Need help?
You hold that.
One
moment.
No. Very tight. Tēnā koutou katoa. Tēnā koe, Minister.
Tēnā koe.
Kia ora koutou.
Thank you very much for coming in front of us again.
We had our opportunity to cover Whānau
Ora yesterday. Today,
we are going across
numerous other parts of Māori
development.
And just so that we're aware, we've actually got
programmed a couple of breaks during this session.
Yes.
The first break will be at approximately 10:30, and then we'll
have another one at approximately 11:30.
That might sound a little bit short in between, but we
will aim for that there as the outcome.
But to begin with, Minister, we'll
provide you with five minutes to provide some introductory comments
before we get into the questioning.
Ae. Mihi ana kia tatou e whakatau nei te
kaupapa o te ata. Ara, te aroha hai hai ki nga
mahi a Te Puni Kōkiri. I anahi.
Ko ta te korero mo te kaupapa, te hotaka,
me te pūtea whakatuwi i a Whānau Ora.
A, a te ra nei he kaupapa anō kei te haere.
Na reira, tēnā tatou katoa. And thank you everyone for coming, and thank you for
your probing questions yesterday and the intelligence that you brought to the
conversation.
Thank you very much.
You certainly raised mine along the way.
It wasn't enough.
Te Puni Kōkiri, as we know, is enabled through the Ministry of Māori
Development Act 1991, and some very clear
purposes
for Te Puni Kōkiri and functions as set out in Section 5
of that legislation. And in August
2024, Cabinet endorsed
my approach, a modernized approach to Māori development and to
position Te Puni Kōkiri for strategic influence.
I'm joined here by the Secretary for Māori Development, Dave Samuels, and
Steve Sutton, along with other RPHR and officials from Te Puni
Kōkiri.
And that positioning is more around ensuring that we're
very clear on the role and the responsibilities of Te Puni
Kōkiri. Within that rubric and the vision of thriving Whānau,
but to ensure that it leads policy advice to the government on
Māori development,
and also iwi and Māori Crown relations.
It has a very firm monitoring and mentoring role.
It takes
leadership around the government's engagement on culture and language,
and importantly, Māori economic development and growth.
So we sort of
encapsulate or characterize Te Puni Kōkiri as having five strategic
priority areas. One we covered off yesterday, Whānau Ora.
Then there's monitoring and mentoring, economic development and growth, culture and
language, and iwi
Māori Crown relations. And I'm sure if we engage
on those issues as we go through today, it could be a more
structured and meaningful conversation for us all, rather than jumping all over
the place. If you want to do that too, I can do that.
I used to do gymnastics once down in Otahuhu for two-door tumblers, and that was
awesome. But if you just want to do one subject at a time that might take
forty-five minutes, that's fine.
So in terms of Māori language and culture, a lot of
talk, a lot of korero,
but you'll be aware that there's been some additional pūtea that's been set aside
as a contingency
for Māori broadcasting, which I'm sure the Honorable Willie Jackson
will be very proud of me for doing alongside the Minister of
Finance. In addition to that, we've also
reallocated
$10 million over five years to reincarnate
and reestablish the Te Māori kaupapa under the rubric Te Māori 2,
which is effectively showcasing our culture and arts to the world through
museum and other interactions. But backing that up with Māori economic
development, things like film, fashion, music, agribusiness, manufacturing, and
everything else at expo into place.
That place will be Europe and it may be some other places as well.
As many of you will know, Te Māori was a raging success forty years
ago, and I think we can emulate that and actually do better,
by having a firm focus on culture as a platform and a
springboard for economic
development and economic growth and diplomatic engagement as
well.
So, the monitoring and mentoring role, we are really focused on lifting
system accountability for Māori outcomes and service adequacy
by constantly identifying, tracking, and carrying forward
issues on the adequacy of the other agencies throughout
government to actually deliver on what they're supposed to deliver on, which is
better outcomes for all citizens, Māori in particular
for Te Puni Kōkiri.
And
where needed, calibration around the responsibilities that the Crown has
vis-à-vis iwi. So making sure that there's a clear
delineation between those kaupapa or matters that
are iwi in orientation,
and those kaupapa matters which are Māori in orientation.
And that's why we have a policy framework known as Te Tōtūhe Ora that has now
been
shared,
and mentored throughout the public service.
I think we had seven agencies that are now in, let's call it training
mode
around Te Tōtūhe Ora.
And making sure that Te Puni Kōkiri is
positioned more like a central agency, that it can
hold other agencies to account,
and ensure that the system is performing better for Māori.
Now, a great example of that, of course, is the government targets,
and we have been very deliberate and we've got a great team working on data and
monitoring led by Adie and others.
I don't know if Adie's here or she- And we should give her the final thing.
Who are very deliberate about making sure that there are
appropriate inquiries made on the delivery on the
government targets vis-à-vis Māori. So it's not just all New Zealanders.
We have a real sense of where things are going well across the eight social
government targets, not the climate change target, but the eight others.
Whether or not serious young youth offenders, or attendance at
school, or
wait times at emergency departments.
We have a sense on how that's going for Māori.
And we also have some additional reporting, which we think is really
important around the improvement of
achievement by Māori across those various spheres that are
outlined in Section 5 [1]
of the Ministry of Māori Development Act, health, education, employment and
training, economic development.
So a very data-driven approach to ensuring that
the monitoring and mentoring work that Te Puni Kōkiri undertakes is not only
credible but enduring and of the nature that other
agencies know they need to come to Te Puni Kōkiri or engage with Te Puni Kōkiri or
watch out, Dave is on you, on your job.
In terms of Māori economic development, there are a variety of
pathways for
Te Puni Kōkiri to activate in this space.
One of them, which we released two weeks ago, is around the Papakāinga National
Environmental State Standard,
which we announced alongside the Ministry for the Environment to enable
up to 10 homes to be built on Māori land blocks without having to
kowtow and run around trying to fill in the red tape at Council.
That means basically less or no resource consent requirements
for Māori landowners to build 10 homes on Māori
land blocks. Now, that is a massive game changer.
And all you have to do, as I mentioned yesterday, is talk with Jackson Tutahi,
TikTok from Hamilton,
who's been putting together a range of initiatives around developing Papakāinga
throughout the country to know that that is a huge step to
enable more economic development and more social and
cultural development on our whenua Māori.
We also have a range of initiatives that were announced last week around supporting
Māori in agribusiness, in the primary sector, support for the Ākato King Salmon
business, which is owned by the Ōnukurū Ngāi Ngāte Pō and others.
The PKW Corporation around energy resilience and building a solar array on the
Waimate Plains in South Taranaki, and also Ngāti Hineuru who are
putting in some
upgrades to their cherry orchards in Te Matau a Māui.
So the Māori Development Fund continues, alongside some
housing investment through Papakāinga, through Sortit Kāinga Ora
programs and repairs,
and
other community resilience initiatives that often draw on the Māori
Development Fund in order to make sure our communities are safe and well.
Finally, the Iwi Māori Crown Relations portfolio.
There's a number of matters that we can describe and refer to, like the
advancement of the Māori Purposes Bill.
Actually, there's two bills that are moving forward.
The improvement in the implementation of treaty settlements and the
decrease in delivery issues that are arising from
outstanding treaty settlement obligations.
That's come down from 3.5% to 1.9% of all the
14,800 obligations there are.
The responses to the whole of system call Crown report
on treaty settlement delivery. Some of those gnarly issues that often pop up
in treaty settlement discussions, sometimes things were missed in the
settlements
documentation and the legislation, and Te Puni Kōkiri has a role and a function to
go and help tidy that up. It's really post-settlement stuff rather than
pre-settlement stuff, which is the purview of Minister Goldsmith and Te Tai
Tokerau.
And of course, something that's very close and near to my heart,
which is the progress resolution of the claims of
thousands of owners known as the Step and Walker to Nelson
tense
fiduciary claims on the top of the South Island.
So overall, positioning Te Puni Kōkiri for strategic influence.
We talked about Whānau Ora yesterday.
Today we can, I think, talk about those other four areas and of course, the hot
topic, which is the putia and the budget appropriation and allocation, which I
know Steve has been staying up late at night
combing through all the data to ask me the hard questions.
Let's go.
Thank you, Minister. Just for the agenda that we have
for us, could I just ask that housing, whenua Māori
and Māori broadcasting and language, should we leave that for this afternoon?
We'll concentrate on all the other stuff-
All right
... this morning. Okay. So, one of the first questions to you.
Oh, yeah.
So we'd all agree, I think, in this room that in the
employment, health, and housing area, Māori are probably
more in need than anyone else.
That sort of comes up all the time, doesn't it?
So given that, Minister,
we've seen a decrease of 190 million since
2023 in terms of Māori development.
How do you
front Māori,
and how do you validate that, justify that when your own department is down
190 million since 2023, given the need
in terms of employment, housing,
and health? That's the first question.
Second one, just if you want to roll off that.
Is this government still committed to a
by Māori for Māori approach? I think that's the question that's
coming from Māori.
If you are, why is initiatives and targets for Māori being
sidelined, being skipped over,
being thrown out? So just a couple of easy questions for you
at the start.
Oh, they were like low balls like that Australian- ...
New Zealand cricket match many years ago. Okay.
Sorry about that.
So let's go.
By Māori for Māori- Absolutely. And that's why we're going
hard across various portfolios, including housing, to ensure
that those relationships around housing continue, and
people build into the programs that have been set up by the previous government and
also by this government around the Maori housing portfolios.
Now, under the previous government, there are about 1,050 homes that were
contracted under the Whāikainga Wairanga program.
There's about 750 that have been built with CCCs.
There's 300 to go. That's three years later.
Under this government, it's about 900 to 1,000.
About 100 have reached CCC. There's about 900 to go just
under the Whāikainga Wairanga . So we've still got probably two, three,
maybe four years of build
runway to ensure that that continues.
In addition to that, some of the Maori housing providers that were
supported and curated under the auspicious leadership of Minister
Peeni Henare and with scaffolding from Minister Jackson have now turned
into strategic partners for the community housing provision, the Budget
24 1,500 homes that were contracted
by the Ministry of Housing Urban Development.
So for example, yesterday I went out to Porirua, Tuki Street, 10
houses of the 125 homes that are being built by Te
Akoru Moawhio, which is a Ngati Toa Rangatira entity that builds into the
1,500 homes announced through Budget 24
for community housing providers.
By Maori for Maori, and actually in some instances, for everyone.
So that's a great example, in my view, where we've started a
program,
and it was started under the previous government, acknowledged, continue with that
program, and actually it's broadened out as well.
And that's something, and a type of whakatauki that my former
chairperson, James Brown, Hemi Taonui,
singer, dancer, movie star, would say, by Maori for Maori, for everyone.
So that's a great example. But when I front
into Maori communities, I say, "Is it better than it was in
2023?" Treaty settlements. Yes. And
under the history and history legacy of the national-led governments, a
lot more treaty settlements have been curated. Treaty settlements implementation.
Yes, it's better now than it was in 2023.
In the last year it's gone from 83% to 86% or less delivery issues.
Two-year-old immunization rates, which is a hot topic of mine, which was 89% in
2017, went to 63.5% in 2023. Now it's back over
65. If there's one thing that we need to sort out, it's make sure our kids are
immunized. Serious violent crime.
Yes, less more Maori victims of serious violent crime. Serious youth offenders.
Yes, decreased significantly and materially.
Emergency housing. Georgie knows, in Hamilton we had 756
kids, most of whom were Maori, living in that defunct
dank dark arrangement emergency housing. Now there's about 60.
Most of those kids have moved out. In fact, nearly 700,
many of whom were Maori. School attendance has improved.
Would we like to see it better? Absolutely.
ED states, yes, it has improved marginally for Maori.
Elective wait times, yes, it has improved marginally for Maori.
Transfers of properties of significance like Korotipu Pa, Orako, and other
properties. Yes, we actually did that, sorted that. Farming.
You can't argue that Maori farmers are doing better under the current arrangements.
Taxation. Minister Willis in Budget '24 ensured that $400
million of taxpayers' money, your money, stayed in Whanau Maori hands
and wasn't sucked up by an enlarging government. Roading.
Absolutely. If you want to fix a road between Gisborne and Opotiki to enable many
Maori to go and visit their whanau for Tangihanga and hui, absolutely.
Inflation, interest rates. Do we think that those affect Maori? Yes, we do.
Free trade agreements, the same. Maori Development Fund, Regional Infrastructure
Fund, fast track projects. 150 projects on the second schedule,
25 of which were owned by Maori. The first or the second one was a Maori-owned
project down in the South Island. Is that better? Yes. Okay.
Accords. Are we delivering on the accords? Yes, we are.
Papakainga, NEES, Greenfields, cancer drugs, tertiary enrollment.
I could range over 20, 40, 60 indicators of
improvement for Maori communities and Maori individuals.
And you know what? The data speaks volumes.
Righty-o. Thank you.
Thank you, Robert.
Thank you. We'll come back to the question.
That was a very broad question with a very broad answer.
That's right. Out of respect to the minister, I let him waffle on.
As I said, questions can accept answers.
Nowhere down the track, nowhere in that response did he actually answer the
question.
No, by far, by Maori .
And then you thought we were on housing-
Yeah
... but now we're not on housing, and can I just come back to the question,
which is, and maybe I'll put it to the officials, given since the
minister's incapable of giving a coherent response.
But I'll ask the
CEO. You're $190 million down, Dave,
over the last three years. This minister's given away $190 million
of Maori money in a time where the need for
Maori has never been higher in terms of jobs,
health,
homes. Never been higher, and your department has gone backwards.
I would like from you, since the minister's unable to do it, to give me a
response of why we have had to give away
so much money and why the department, despite what the minister's saying,
is struggling so much at the moment.
Oh.
Well, that's for Dave. I wonder.
That's for me.
Since the minister can't answer it.
No, no, I can answer that. And then I'll pass it to Dave.
Will you try to attempt to answer the question this time?
I'll answer that again for you, because I don't think you heard the previous
answer.
No, I did.
But I'll answer that again for you.
The role and the responsibility of the Ministry for Maori Development is well set
out in a statute, the strategic intentions document, and by way of a cabinet
decision that was made, is to position itself for strategic influence and
not be a DMA type entity, which is what maybe
you and others want it to be.
190 million. Why'd you give it away?
What others want it to be. We absolutely have to make sure that the
government and government agencies which can basically
manage- 99.5% of the entire budget, which is not in Te Puni
Kōkiri, are responsive to the needs of Māori.
If we think that Te Puni Kōkiri is the best entity, for example, to reduce the
serious youth offender rate amongst Māori, or to
massively and materially change the two-year-old immunization
rates amongst Māori kids, or to run
down the treaty settlement process pre-settlement, then we're
confusing the role of Te Puni Kōkiri.
Mm.
Te Puni Kōkiri is not the Department of Māori Affairs.
Ah.
It's just not. So we have to be absolutely articulate in defining
and making sure that the role of Te Puni Kōkiri is elevated to more
than a cottage program manager, which is
not what it is. Now, there have been instances where that's gone very well.
For example, Whānau Ora. Listen, we talked about this yesterday.
Success, and now we're going to build on it and make it even better. Okay?
But there are some things, actually, it's better that we ensure that other
agencies which have the bulk of the budget, the bulk of the staff, the bulk of the
regulatory empowerment, perform for Māori.
I agree.
We have to make sure that that is done in a material and a
defensible and a credible way. Because we can't say, "Oh, it's okay.
All Māori issues have to be managed and implemented and programmed out of Te Puni
Kōkiri." We don't have the budget.
No.
We don't.
Because you-- well, you gave it all away, so.
No. No. And-
190 million.
What I also say is that I do not accept the
characterization of Tama or Dave giving away the money.
But what we've done is we've elevated the role.
All agencies, bar about five or six, have had to give up some
budget.
I-- thank you. We've got to the-
So health, education, defense, law and order
We've got to the resource.
All other agencies have had to give up something.
But at the same breath, we've also had some wins.
We've had ups and downs. One of them, of course, there's an issue dear to your
heart, Māori broadcasting. Thank you.
Okay.
So I want to ask this question. Is that fair?
That's what I want to ask the TPK-
Yes
... team. I want to ask this question.
Given Māori
development
TPK, I should say, is the most underfunded and under-resourced government
department. Given that, you have a think about that,
Tama. Go and have a Google something.
But-
Just a giggle or Google
... if you want to go back, you want to go back 20 years.
No, because you're right, Minister. You talked about-- you're quite right.
Māori
TPK is about policy development. There was a time when Māori
Affairs was looking after everything. You know this, though.
Housing, health, everything like that.
Now the brief's changed and the pūtea is not so much.
But given Māori are so much under attack, shouldn't the minister, who-- I don't
know who I'm asking this question to.
Is it you, Tama, or is it-
It's Dave's turn.
Is it to Dave? Right. Given that Māori are so much under
attack, is it right that TPK takes a cut?
I would say that principally, ethically, it is not right, given Māori are
the most under attack group right now in this country.
Given TPK is the most under-resourced, underfunded government
department, why on earth hasn't the minister gone in and said, "No, I'm not going
to take a cut"? It's not right.
I can't answer that question, but I can answer the first question.
Is that okay-
Absolutely
... Mr. Chair? Okay.
Well, he couldn't answer the first question, so you're in good company.
No. The first-
He could answer that in Parliament
... question you asked was really about leading.
Te Puni Kōkiri has five core functions.
One of them is to lead.
Mm.
And it's to lead policy advice, and the advice in terms of
relationships between iwi and Māori and the Crown.
That's a leadership function. Under the Act, Te Puni Kōkiri
has the responsibility to promote achievement.
We do that under Section 5 of the Act.
Secondly, Te Puni Kōkiri has a responsibility to monitor.
Mm.
So we have to be clear about what our functions are.
Monitor the government departments?
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah. Now, what you've talked about in terms of health,
jobs, homes, there are agencies
responsible for leading those.
Not Te Puni Kōkiri.
But your job is to monitor them, right?
That's correct.
Mm.
So by-
Are they failing Māori at the moment, Dave?
Well, we can go into that, but let me go,
stay on point here, because I think it is a fundamental point.
Mm-hmm.
In November, your own report in November
2025-
Mm
...
identified that Te Puni Kōkiri should align its strategic
intentions to Section 5 of the Act. Your report.
The Select-
Yeah
... Committee's report said that.
We launched the strategic intentions document prior to that report
that did exactly that, and I've reflected on those five
functions that are in our strategic intentions document.
So those are our five functions. That's what we do.
We don't lead in health. We don't lead in
jobs. We don't lead in homes. But we hold
them to account. It's really important because if we try and do
that, given the size of Te Puni Kōkiri, and the
fact that the expertise lies over in those mainstream
agencies with the resources-
... we will have to sacrifice something else, because those are big jobs.
They're responsible for delivering to all New Zealanders-
True
... including Māori.
And
to go to your second question, which is a policy
question on what the functions are of Te Puni Kōkiri,
until that changes, I'll do
what I'm mandated to do under legislation
and under Cabinet
and under the direction of the minister,
and that's appropriate. And that's what I'm funded to do.
Those are our core functions
I think-
So I think-
Oh, go ahead.
So just given that I come back to the question, the minister gave away $190
million in the last three years in terms of
TPK. Minister, the funding's gone down by that
over the last three years.
But some of that was time limited. It was sugar rushed in the previous government.
But
the minister has failed us in that area.
We haven't had one extra cent from this minister for
his department.
No, that's not true. That is blatantly untrue.
Well, let's say no, that's what the minister-
We've just got a tech contingency
for broadcasting, right? And we know that there was sugar rush money that
was not baseline.
We are seeking to ensure, as Te Puni Kōkiri, that we get clarity on how
that tech contingency will land, and I'm hoping, and let's see where this
lands, that some of that gets baseline.
Now, we also have had to ensure that
additional matters like the Nelson tents, like
the Māori Wardens, like the Māori Women's Welfare League,
like a couple of other items, have been given appropriate
scaffolding and support. Now, you talk about $190 million,
and I appreciate that, but some of that was time limited, like the Kaitaia Airport,
for example. That was a one-off batch of money to help fix that
place. And fortunately, it was preserved with the
advocacy of Te Puni Kōkiri because we know of the importance of
air and travel into Kaitaia when the Mangamuka
Gorge breaks and the Kaeo Bridge breaks, and those two things break all the
time. So you've got to have that access, and one of the reasons why we went hard on
that was because we knew that the Kaitaia Airport, by way of
treaty settlements, would ultimately be returned to the
hapū and the iwi there, which was done under our leadership and Dave's
support. So some of that money was time limited,
and I think it's important to delineate that.
Admittedly, some of that has come off as a result of budget
cuts and pressures, which many, many agencies have had to share.
Would I like
more resource to be in Te Puni Kōkiri? Yes.
Do I advocate for that? Yes. Do I think that Whānau Ora should get more money
in the future? Absolutely yes. But let's make sure,
as from yesterday's discussion, that system is really credible,
data-driven, evidenced, and functional, and then we will have a
more powerful argument to go and advocate for more pūtea.
Now-
Orangi.
Mōrena. Te Minita.
A key word that you mentioned, time-limited funding.
Yes.
And that's been quite a topic in our select committee
hui over the last few months. The question is, to what extent
does reliance on that time-limited funding actually undermine the
sustainability of Māori development services?
Well, I think there's time-limited funding across a range of agencies, some of
which do have major influence over outcomes for Māori and outcomes
for iwi. So I don't think it's restricted just to Te Puni Kōkiri, the
time-limited funding. For example, the Jobs for Nature funding.
That was time-limited funding. That was huge money that was put into Kai
MahI Putataio. And some of those projects I think were really, really
credible and positive and engaged and employed a lot of our
whānau. Then some of those other projects, they never really work.
Mm.
And
I sort of have some experience because I was involved in
running one of those Jobs for Nature projects out in the Hauraki Gulf.
So do I
think that time-limited funding is a good enduring way to
support some things? No. But is it appropriate sometimes? Yes.
Sometimes it is appropriate because there might be a specific project or might be a
specific capital investment that is required to be made where
time-limited funding does work. I think what I
might observe is that in terms of those four
areas that we're sort of describing today,
I would certainly like, where credible, more pūtea to be allocated.
Whatever the case, Te Puni Kōkiri has to hold the
99.5% of pūtea in the budget that does not come
to Te Puni Kōkiri to account for
delivering on Māori outcomes.
Mm.
And can that be better? Absolutely.
Supplementary. Sorry, just-
Go ahead, yeah
... just one.
If I can just add to that, some of that is for a reason.
Kaitaia Airport-
Yeah
... was completed,
and some of that was for weather events-
Yeah
... that happened at the time. And so those were
time limited.
Supplementary, Mr. Chair.
Supplementary, yeah.
Delise.
Baseline funding. Are you committed to lifting baseline funding, knowing
that many of the entities in the kaupapa that have
existed under the time-limited funding still want to
exist and still have relevancy in today's modern society?
We're talking-- I'm not just referring to widespread.
I am also of the broadcast
collective as well. But
where time-limited funding must expire, baseline.
Are you committed to lifting the baseline funding across?
Well, I'm committed to advocating for that.
That's not a decision that I alone can make.
And that advocacy is something that
both Dave and the Ministry of Māori Development and I continue to
pursue.
But we do not ultimately,
as Te Mana Ō Te Tai, control budget.
That's something that we have to advocate for and work on.
Do you agree that it must be lifted?
Well, I think we have to make sure that we use the funding, the budget
appropriation that we have in a very prudent and fiscally responsible way.
And I think that there are some areas where I'm sure in the
next budget round, wherever we may be politically,
that will continue to be advocacy on my part for some of the funding to be lifted
in some areas. After yesterday's discussion, I
think you've got a sense that I'm pretty committed to ensuring and supporting
Whānau Ora to be successful. And if it is successful, then the
advocacy should be strong from all of us to lift the funding for Whānau Ora.
Yes, Dave.
As a general rule, we operate
both non-departmental and departmental funding.
And as a general rule, we work between 14 and 16% for
departmental, and the remainder is non-departmental.
And non-departmental goes out into the communities, the
broadcasting sector, and to whānau ora.
But when we
are managing
limited resources, we do prioritize what is
going out
as opposed to the organization.
Mm-hmm.
Currently, we operate at 16%.
So most of the funding that goes through Te Puni Kōkiri is like Postbox.
It goes through Te Puni Kōkiri and out to community entities or
businesses, Māori businesses, or the broadcasting entities.
It doesn't just stay in Te Puni Kōkiri. I think it's 16%, isn't it?
Yeah.
Stays within Te Puni Kōkiri, and the other 84 is out to others.
And that sort of aligns with our view, locally led, whānau centered, government
enabled.
Yeah, that's right.
That's the way we sort of roll.
In our strategic intentions, that is our approach.
Excellent.
Our delivery approach is whānau centered, locally led, government
enabled, and we pride ourselves in operating in a lean
organization.
It is.
The need is out there.
Yes. Yeah.
It doesn't mean that we wouldn't want more-
No. Yeah, yeah
... for the organization.
Absolutely.
But that's how we balance it.
I was just going to ask one more supplement.
Yeah.
Is 16% sustainable
for TPK to function, capacity building, capabilities, as well
as 16% sustainable with the current funding that's allocated
to TPK?
My answer to that is yes,
it is. Now, I operate within that, I plan
within that.
That's why I have to keep to my core functions.
That's why I can't go off and do other things even when I see the
need. I need to stick to my core functions.
Yeah. Sort of like me at home, really need to stick to my core functions as a
husband and a father. If I go off and try and play rugby every weekend, that runs
into a problem.
No.
Even though I might be a good rugby player.
Maybe.
Thank you, Bob.
Supplementary from Georgie.
Yeah. Kia ora. I wanted to ask around the extreme weather
events, cyclones-
Yes
... floods that we've seen over the last-
Tragic
... couple of years, and I know we will see in the future.
There was a million dollars went to the very, very valuable work
that Marae do across the Motu in the previous year.
However, there's nothing in this budget that allocates
resource to Marae
to be able to respond to floods and cyclones in their communities.
Are you expecting them to do that mahi for free
when the next cyclone hits? What is the plan there?
Well, I just wanted to acknowledge there have been some pretty difficult and
challenging weather events over many years, but they seem to be
intensifying and more often. I think it was every three weeks there was a big
weather event at the start of this year.
George has joined us. George is responsible for
Te Tairāwhiti
from the East Coast through to-
Wairoa
... Wairoa. And has been very close to that action of the North Island
weather event funding that was channeled through Marae.
Now, when those events happen,
often what would happen with government is that action will be taken
on a timely basis to ensure support for different communities.
There was a million dollars that was allocated to various Marae over
various events, from what I recall, Dave.
Yeah.
And there are a couple of others that were Marae associated.
They weren't Marae, but they were Marae associated and helping out.
Was that sufficient at the time? I would say in the East Coast example,
yes. In the Northland example, yes.
But we also used other budgets across government in order to
enable relief and mitigation. For example,
we engaged with THL to send out motor homes
across the East Coast and Northland, and there might be one in the Bay of Plenty,
but that came out of a different budget.
So we've got to be agile to make sure that we use different
sources, not just one source. Separately, and you might be aware of
this,
where there's something massive and significant, a la
floodplains Marae, they're never going to
continue in the current climate, then we have
provided some additional funding.
Some of that was actually approved under the previous government, some of it was
approved under this government, to relocate Marae.
Now, that is a massive intervention on the part of the government,
recognizing that those places are of significant cultural significance, but
also have some
functions over and above the cultural function.
So,
two months ago, Tangowhatu Marae, probably the
picture of the Cyclone Gabrielle disaster-
Mm
... was supported for 16 million to relocate from the Tangowhatu
Valley up onto a hill just down past Whakaaki, 12
million to Potane, and others to five Marae on the East Coast.
So is it comprehensive all across the country?
There has been some work that's been done between the Iwi Chairs Forum, He Tākai
Ā-Huaranui, the climate change group within the Iwi Chairs Forum, and
Simon Watts, the
Climate Change Minister, to allocate some funding support across
some Marae. One week ago, two weeks ago, some
of that funding was announced. The work has also done a whole bunch
of review on all Iwi Marae throughout the country, we're talking about 1,000
Marae.
Mm.
And identified those Marae that are most exposed to
not only flood inundation but also sea inundation, and then
trying to figure out how can we address those issues on a
longer-term basis. Ditto the Urupā.
There was an item on the news this week about that.
Oh, yes.
So that's another matter that Minister Watts is talking to.
So not all that money goes through Te Puni Kōkiri, not all the work goes through Te
Puni Kōkiri. But we are holding those various agencies
to account or liaising with them to ensure that the agencies are
responsive
In front of and behind massive events.
George, do you want a couple of minutes just to talk about the East Coast, how that
rolled?
Yes.
So,
as you would understand, when a weather event hits, particularly in places as
remote as the East Coast, the natural place for whanau to
congregate or go to gather at is at their marae.
So marae are then expected to stand up and provide,
I suppose, that
facility for them to come to. So they feed them, they sleep there,
etc. So what the
Marae Relief Fund enabled us to do was to be able to reimburse the marae for those
costs-
Mm
... of feeding, of having whanau come and stay.
Yeah.
I think also, too, what was noted, particularly up in Te Araroa, there
were a number of-- It was still summer, there were a number of tourists there-
Yeah
... up for the events. So they congregate at the marae, and they had an
amazing cultural experience for a week with our whanau based at
that marae.
It enabled us to
reimburse those costs so that they're not out of pocket when there's strikes.
Okay. Mr. Chair, can I just belabor a little bit?
I just want to give you a couple examples, Georgie, so you understand how
governments can be responsive over time.
And it's not just this government, it's the previous government as well.
When Cyclone Gabrielle hit, just before that, some money had been
taken out of the Provincial Growth Fund.
This is the fund that Minister Jones is often associated with, our Dalmatian uncle.
And that money was used to build up the
stopbanks in Greenmeadows and Tamatea in Taradale.
Okay, so that down in Napier.
Those stopbanks were lifted
about that much, or about a meter,
out of the Provincial Growth Fund.
Right.
The flood got to about that much before the top of those
stopbanks. If it had gone over the stopbanks, a lot of people would have died,
effectively.
In the same breath, people often relocate to marae, but
some, a whole retirement village, went to St. Joseph's Maori Girls College.
And they stayed there for three or four days, maybe longer.
Elderly folks, kaumātua from the retirement village.
And just giving you an example of how we have to take action across a variety
of agencies and efforts from government, and that was under the previous
government, to build the resilience that we need to stop these things from
happening. It's not perfect.
Did I-- When the, was it a cyclone,
had happened in the last week of January, first week of February this year, Te
Araroa and Wharekaheka in particular really felt the brunt of the
tailwind. Okay. They got wiped out, been separated.
The road basically broke in the middle, so whanau couldn't go to school.
Basically, it was broken. When that happened, what we had to
do was
help people on the ground, like Anipaa Uruhuruwai and others, and then
somehow get some accommodation into
that location. So essentially, we got Tourism
Holdings involved, Grant Webster, and he sent 30
motorcars, motorhomes out there, which landed in
between weeks one and three.
So 20, 30 motorhomes landed there.
We know that motorhomes isn't where people need to sleep for a
year, so the next step was getting some cabins up there.
Those cabins were in the management and ownership of Toitū Te Ara
Awhiti and Tatau Tatau or Wairoa, which had inhaled them from Cyclone
Gabrielle, were then provided some pūtea out of housing to get
those shipped in and landed at Pōtaka Marae, Wharekaheka,
and Te Araroa. Those cabins were then connected, and now you've got
families who have moved out of the marae into the motorhomes, out of the motorhomes
into those cabins, as a medium-term solution
for what is a massive issue, which is the road and
the climate issues that you describe.
Okay. We'll now jump to our supplementary question from Georgie.
Thanks. Just briefly, thank you for that.
You talked about reimbursement of the marae, the maraes when they
had expenses, but I guess the key issue that I see there is that
reimbursing a marae relies on the marae
having the resource in the first place.
How are you tackling that to make sure that when
a random, well, one in three week event
hits any marae in the country, they can respond with the
resources and don't have to wait for reimbursement after the fact?
If I can answer that.
You are right that it relies on
the funding before the fact, but
in the case of Te
Punakākori, that would be our situation as well.
We don't hold an emergency fund for this.
No.
If you think of the last number of years, they've been years of
crises, whether that's pandemic, weather events, etc.
And what normally occurs when that happens is there is
some response that occurs at the center, and then if required,
we are called in to assist in that response
or that recovery. An example would be the
funds for the
silt remediation-
Yeah
... that occurred a number of years ago.
Mm.
And the funds were transferred from NPI to Te Punakākori
because we had the reach through the regional
offices, and George is part of that team, out on Te Ara Awhiti to be
able to get those funds out. But we don't hold them within Te Punakākori as a
contingency.
I think the other thing too, Georgie, is that our role is making sure, one of our
roles is making sure that NEMA,
the council's NEMA and the Defense Force are also agile enough to respond
because they are the real frontline.
You want helicopters, you've got to call the Defense Force or Black Hawk up in
Whakatane to get things moving. So across government,
we're cognizant of those issues, and some of the changes that have been proposed
for the emergency management legislation have tilted to ensure that
Māori are involved in the planning
Around different areas for emergency response.
Okay, Steve.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I know that we've sort of moved slightly into the whenua
Māori space-
Yeah ... but given we're talking about the marae- Yes ... resilience.
And just to clarify, Mr. Chair, are we certainly staying away from housing until
later on? Yeah.
We'll try and do that although we did have a big answer at the beginning.
But some big questions on housing. Try and keep the minister in line there, Chair.
Yeah, stick to the program.
Further to your responses around emergency
preparedness, so you've got a
compensation fund post-event
with the growth of extreme weather events.
When hell hits the fan in the regions, people will head to the
local marae-
Sometimes
... from across the community.
Yeah.
In millions.
Often the case. Yes.
And local... And marae are very well equipped to deal with large numbers of people.
Yes.
Because they have whare kai, and they have-
Mm
... um, wharenui with bedding options, feeding
options, usually commercial scale kitchens.
So, an amazing broad community resource.
Why are you not, in the context of the fact that we
have more frequent and extreme weather events, actually actively
funding marae resilience,
noting that your government has removed funding for
emergency resilience in terms of climate events across the board.
But specifically in your portfolio, why is it a $1
million compensation after the fact rather than an active
funding of greater marae resilience?
Well, there's no significant funding that's been allocated through Te Puni
Kōkiri to fund the 100 or 300 or 1,000
marae. There is some funding there to support community resilience, to
support marae resilience in certain instances.
But I think what you're talking about or what you're describing is something, a
matter of extent. And
it has been reactive as it was under the previous government.
And we've used those funds in a
responsible way to ensure that those marae that have been severely
affected are given support. The five up the East Coast, $50
million announced in May last year, Inemoria and a few others,
Rangatira Takapu, and then the two in Napier, which were given
category three status. That was a reactive
response from the previous government, and we added some more pūtea,
and we got that money away, and that money's been committed now.
I think what you're saying is that we should go out now and
fund marae to get ready.
And many of those marae that are going through marae
redevelopment projects actually are rebuilding those marae in a
manner that handles and manages flood inundation and
nasty weather events. For example, a papakāinga called Parihaka on
the west coast out in Taranaki, where David and I are partly from, has just gone
through a $25 million refurb of the infrastructure that can now better
manage stormwater and other matters, which 10 years ago would cause all
sorts of havoc for the houses and the wharenui there.
So as marae get refurbed and get moving,
often there is a better sense and a better appreciation of the
emergency management situation, and they build for that.
But if what you're saying is we should go out as a government and
rebuild the thousand marae to accommodate the one in
one month or one in 10 year or one in 100 year event, that's a different
discussion.
Yes, but it's the question I'm asking you, and I'll put it to you
that
as a broader society with your responsibility for Māori-Crown relations,
which is my primary question I'd like to get to at some point,
we have relied on the generosity of iwi Māori-
Yeah
... to be there
when an extreme weather event occurs.
Mm-hmm.
And as the Crown, you are saying
that
iwi Māori need to carry the can for the broader
community, not just for their own, but for the broader
community in terms of
there's no
regional provincial strategy around how we
deal with what happens to people in that acute
crisis moment of an extreme weather event, then head to the local
marae, but you're not resourcing the marae.
You're asking that marae to dig even deeper into their own pot
to cover-
To-
... the rest of the community. And that is
indeed the generosity of Māori across the board.
Okay.
They do that, but it's not fair for the Crown to not
step up and take responsibility for its part.
Okay. I think that's fair, and I think that ultimately,
Steve, if I take you back down to the grassroots level, if what you're
saying is the government should pay for six beasts to be in every fridge
and freezer around every marae in the country-
No
... and renew that every three months, I'm not on your planet.
That's not what I'm saying.
I'm on a different planet. We need it.
So what I'm saying is that- We are doing that ...
actually there is some funding, often on a reactionary
basis, but sometimes on a proactive basis as well, when marae are
redeveloped or if marae have to be shoosed up
to accommodate some of the flood inundation issues.
There is some pūtea, but don't think that all marae are the same.
Some are actually very resilient. Some are not.
Your suggestion and characterization that I and the Crown are saying
marae and Māori have to carry the can for everyone, again, is
adjacent to what we are saying. It's very adjacent.
What we are saying is, actually, we recognize that marae
have a huge role to play. Not the only organizations.
Sometimes it's stores, sometimes it's community halls, sometimes it's bowling
clubs. It's not just marae. But we do
invest and provide pūtea for various marae initiatives
that will act- In a more resilient way for those types of
situations. Just think about the Rangitū Marae down Wainui Road in Ōhiwa Harbour,
which we've just committed $10 million to, which will no doubt be
used as a gathering point for all of his relations in the
event that there's a massive disaster, weather or other disaster,
in that Ōtāki, Ōhiwa area.
Wainui is right on the coast, so
Yeah. So people will go there. But it's not just the coast.
These things happen all over the place.
So let's talk about Cyclone Gabrielle.
If that was 50Ks west, Hawke's Bay would not have been hit as it was.
It would've been the Rangitīkei River Valley. So let's just be real firm.
There are some reactionary measures, but there's also some proactive
measures that I would call sometimes business as usual.
As marae refurb, they get better resilience built into
those refurbs.
You're comfortable that there doesn't need to be more support for that resi-
I'd love there to be more support. Me, personally, I'd love there to be more
support in strategic areas. Can we do 1,000 marae?
I think that would be hard. Should we look at some marae that
are often used, like some of those marae around Wairoa?
Like there's some of these marae, like Henare Pua, up the east coast.
Kaikohe
Ngāi Tamanu, up at Whangārei where Huhana's from.
Yes, absolutely. And some of those marae are not really in the best place.
Oh, yeah. That's part of the problem.
Yeah. And as a result of that, in some instances,
where funds available, we have provided enough money to move them.
Did I-
Can we move 1,000? No.
Did I infer a commitment that you're going to push for more funding for that?
I have advocated for more funding for marae, Mahi, many, many times.
And sometimes that is successful.
For example, fixing up the
asbestos-maligned
sleeping quarters at Rātana Pā,
$10 million.
Rangitū, $10 million. Waitangi, $10 million.
Parihaka, well it ended up being 25.
So that happens. Does it happen at the scale that I'd like it to in the relevant
places that I think there could be more resilience?
Probably not, but we've got to work on. Nobody's perfect except my wife.
Okay, we're getting close to our break, but Willie
So I can only do a supp here, eh?
It's-- I know you-- Well, is, are there any more supps?
I think what Ken was just saying-
I've got a primary, if possible.
I've got a
Oh, come on, let's do it. Let's do it. Let's not worry about a break.
We'll just keep going.
Well, yeah.
Let's just talk
We have to talk to
... a couple of them.
Yeah, um-
He would love to talk to you, Dave
... in terms of just on the marae funding, you
do remember that your colleague, Mr Jones, got 100
million out with us. Don't you?
Yeah. A- a- well-
One hundred million.
It was 96, but yes.
Ninety-six.
I just, let's just-
I thought that was absolutely awesome.
Yeah. So-
Me personally, I think that's awesome
... so there is precedent in terms of-
Yeah
... a major funding going to our marae.
I'd like to do this.
Okay, not peanuts and crumbs that you've given out.
Pardon?
But
90-
We gave 50 to five of your marae on the East Coast.
50, 5-0.
96.
And another 28 to two in Napier.
Shane Jones gave 96-- Well, as you said, 96-
78.
Let's, let's get to a question.
Well, but I-
Seven marae.
But all, all I'm saying is that given that's the fact,
there was precedent there. I want to come back just to some of the
primary stuff here because we're just coming to the end here.
And I just want to hear from you, because we touched on it earlier, in
terms of the government agencies-
Mm-hmm
... and the work that's been done by TPK.
Have government agencies failed Māori in their
delivery, Dave, because we've seen the minister give away 190
million over the last three years, gave the money away.
Gave it away to these government agencies.
Given their misrepresentation.
Now, you cut the money back. You didn't advocate it for in the
budget.
It was time limited. Yeah.
So we're hearing, I just want to, as we come to the end of the session,
your
lobbying and your negotiating with these government agencies, have they failed
Māori, Dave and Minister, in terms of their
delivery for Māori? Because all the statistics say they have failed
Māori miserably.
Yes or no?
Well, what about education?
Well, just check the statistics in terms of Māori employment, if you doubt
that. Or Māori health.
I don't think it's a binary outcome.
What I'd say is we believe that
kāwanatanga services and support needs to be effective,
and there are areas we can improve on.
Absolutely, and that's part of the function of Te Puni Kōkiri to hold to
account the adequacy of the provider, the provision of those services, but
particularly in those four areas: health, education, employment, training, and
economic developments. Do we think that kāwanatanga can do better?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Absolutely. Do we think that the sky's falling
in and everything's going to blow up? No.
But do we think we can do better? Yes.
And that's one of the reasons that I'm here in this game, in politics, is to ensure
the quality of outcomes that were committed and guaranteed to us under Article
Three.
Absolutely.
Dave.
Look, I've said it here before,
so I'll just reiterate that the public service cannot deliver to all Māori.
That's clear,
in terms of-
Reach
... reach, in terms of the delivery of services, and if you look at our
strategic intentions document, that's in there.
And that's why we have an approach.
And our approach in terms of delivering to Māori is
whānau centered, locally led, government enabled.
And that's why we are so supportive of our flagship
approach being practiced through Whānau Ora.
Yes.
So
that's acknowledged.
We know that
the amount of money that goes through public services to the community,
that half of that is spent on the most needy.
Mm-hmm.
15% of the population. And there's a reason why the public service
can't deliver to all Māori. Part of that is because of 186 years of
history.
Hmm.
Part of that is-
Trust
... because of trust and confidence.
The fact that Māori have lower trust in the public service than the wider
population. So we know that. We-
What we try and do is identify that through our monitoring
function.
Mm.
But also look at solutions to say, "Well, how could we do this better?"
Yes.
And at a very broad
statement would be to engage the community to
deliver through the community.
Or change the function of Maori of TPK.
Well, that's a legislative, um
Is that an option we-
But if I just-- Just to be honest here, when I
say the public service cannot deliver to all Maori, I include
me and TPK.
Mm.
We are the Crown.
Right.
So when it comes, we are an agent of the Crown.
So when it comes to the mistrust,
I think the community, the Maori community, and I'm not talking about Dave Samuels,
I'm talking about a public servant who is the chief executive over a Crown
agency. We are in the same boat.
We have to acknowledge that. There are many reasons why we haven't
released, as a public service, we haven't released some of these
functions to the community. Part of that is because our
staff are missional. Part of that is because we think we know the answer,
and we have to realize
clearly, and you've indicated this, clearly we're not
delivering, including TPK, and that's why I would say we do
need to let go here and deliver more through the community.
So,
one of the reasons why I'm so enthused and energized around the regional
offices at Te Puni Kōkiri is that they do have insight into some things that
work out in the community, that work better through locally led Whānau centered
delivery rather than maybe Crown delivery.
And you might have seen, if you haven't, we'll get to that this afternoon, why
there's been a tilt away from Kainga Ora into a more agnostic
way of looking at the provision of housing.
Community housing providers, we're all about ones that are credible.
Whether or not it's Emerge over in Georgie's neck of the woods over in Ham East on
River Road, or Strive up in Auckland, whoever it might be.
If they are better at delivering the house at a more competitive cost, and actually
the wraparound support that these Whānau need, well, why don't we fund
them or help them rather than moving all the resource towards Kainga Ora?
We have to be agnostic about in place, what is the better solution.
If it's an apples for apples on the cost, what is a better solution?
Anyway, I'm mindful of the time.
Yeah.
Thankful Dave-
I don't disagree with that at all.
Yes.
Because, and I know we're wrapping up here, but it does bring to
the question in terms of the role of
TPK sometimes, right? Because you're talking about devolution to community
providers, which we all support, but also-
Which is credible.
Yeah. Absolutely.
Yes.
But the other side of it is TPK is so under-resourced,
and the call on TPK is huge.
Absolutely.
It's huge.
You get into that in the next session.
Yep, I think that's all agreed. Right, it's at 10:30 now.
We're going to take a 15-minute break, and we'll have Steve Abel
kicking off with the first primary question we'll move to.
So we'll reconvene back at 10:45, please.
Is this one
Mr Clark.
Right.
We'll kick off again, and as I said before, we'll kick off with a primary
question from Steve.
Can I just make one comment before Steve kicks off?
Not too long.
No, it's a very short one.
Local governments and NEMA have obligations in the medium instance for
responding to
events, emergency events. And I think there needs to be a bit more
holding to account of local government, in particular, to make sure that they are
reimbursing and funding
Marae and others in similar situations. Steve, did you have a comment?
Oh, thank you. So I think that getting some transparency over that would be
good, so all members of Parliament know in an event this is what's supposed to
happen. And in some instances, in some regions, it's better than others.
It's actually a fair comment, actually, about us understanding the whole mechanics
of that with those sorts of things.
But anyway, let's kick off into-
Yeah, let's go Steve
... your primary question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Minister,
we put some questions to the media, Minister of Treaty
Negotiations yesterday that he
said were not his
ambit and that they are more appropriately put to you.
Oh, the old grammar school jibe.
That's right. He's the grammar school boy gone bad.
But-
Come on. Not that bad.
Good man. Good man.
He said that it was your purview-
No, okay. We've seen
... so I put it to you that the policies
of this government
have been described as an unrelenting assault on Maori
rights and inherently inconsistent with the Treaty partnership.
Just most recently, the actions around amending the
treaty clauses have been described as having no apparent benefits
and carried significant risk to the Maori-Crown relationship.
The government's own RIS said that there's no...
Well, said that, that was a quote from the RIS.
In terms of amending Coastal Area Act, a Court of Appeal decision
regarding customary rights was described as a gross
breach of the treaty. And in terms of education
policies,
the Tribunal found that the Crown have breached the treaty principle of
partnership, active protection and good government by attempting to
downgrade treaty obligations in education.
So in terms of that Maori-Crown relationship, I
put it to you as the minister responsible
that it is at an all time low, that your government
has done more harm to that relationship than
any government in the last 20 or 30 years.
And
how do you as the minister responsible-
Sure
... for the post-settlement relationship and for the
broader principle of there being a healthy Maori-Crown relationship,
deal with that reality?
Well, first, I think your opinion's spurious and chicanerous.
Yeah.
And it is a very strong opinion, but I'd say it's mischievous and dangerous to be
opining that way.
Just be clear-
That's the first. No, that's my turn. That's the first thing.
The second thing is-
But Waitangi Tribunal-
No, no, you've expressed an opinion.
Steve. Steve, you've asked a question
You've expressed an opinion. You've asked the opinion. Now it's my turn.
So spurious, dangerous, mischievous, chicanerous. Okay?
That's how I'd describe your opinion.
It's the Tribunal-
The second thing is that-
It's the Tribunal's opinion
... the second... No. No. It's Steve's opinion.
The second thing is that
in terms of the long laundry list that I gave earlier
today about how there's been improvements in the achievement of a range of things,
if you're saying that none of that is important, that none of that matters, that
improving two-year-old immunization rates is of no consequence to the
health and the well-being of both Whanau Maori
and the relationships that the Crown has with Iwi-
Yeah
... I think that that is very myopic and the blinkers need to be removed.
So let's get to real basic
issues around the indicators of health and
well-being, and then I'll come to your claims and your opinions.
Youth offenders, serious crime, ED stays,
farming, roading, all these things
I think have improved the health and well-being of Maori and also of the Maori
economy.
Nonsense.
Now,
on the treaty principles, maker, education policies,
yes, there are some challenges. Am I
responsible for that? Is Te Puni Kōkiri responsible for that? No.
We went through what the role and responsibility of Te Puni Kōkiri is earlier
today. Te Puni Kōkiri is not responsible for those, and as the Minister for
Maori-Crown Relations, I have some involvement in it.
But those were driven by other ministers. As you know.
Now, on the Conservation Act, which is a separate portfolio, I'll talk about
that tomorrow in the conservation.
Now, I invite you to participate in that select committee scrutiny
too.
So just before we go to the next supplementary-
Supplementary
... I want stronger connections to the vote that we're talking
about because we're getting a very wide, and
we're getting very wide answers as a result of that.
So please get it succinctly connected to the vote that we're talking about.
Away you go, Steve.
Mr. Chair, can I-
Absolutely
... just push back a little bit on that because
we had a broad opening ambit and then we went into some
detail around emergency management stuff.
But we sort of didn't get a chance to Uh, push back on that
broad opening
spiel that the minister gave. So-
So is it-
One more question that's a bit broader
... Well, is it connected to the vote? Absolutely.
It is.
I guess so. Yeah, if you can, if you show us from the expo-
Funding in terms of the tribunal?
The vote trend has gone down.
That's uncontested
in terms of what was expended from
2021 through to what is projected to be expended '27 through to
'29, '30.
Mm.
In the context of
what the Waitangi Tribunal, not myself-
Yeah, sure
... and the regulatory impact statement from officials
to the Minister
of Justice, defining
the actions of this government as a significant risk to the Maori-Crown
relationship, as an unrelenting assault on Maori rights and
inherently inconsistent-
Obviously
... with treaty partnership. Those are not my words.
Those are words from the Waitangi Tribunal and officials.
Hand on heart, Tama, and I know you are out in
the community, as we all are.
Are you not receiving the feedback from Iwi Maori,
that they find this government to be
in an unrelenting assault and attack
on them?
Well, what I find-
Do you not get that feedback?
What I find when I go into the community-
And if you don't, how is it?
... is that most Maori that I talk with and
liaise with, and Iwi that I talk with and liaise with,
definitely do not want the police defunded.
They definitely do not want the roads to stay in the conditions they're in.
They definitely do not want two-year-old immunization rates to be in the inglorious
state that we inhaled them in. So, I think that
it's not a binary response to your question.
What I'm saying is that-
It's not a response at all.
No, no. You're asking for a yes or no.
No, no
And I'm not prepared to give that. So, I think that there are some challenges.
There are some things that could be better, but there are some things that are
going really, really well. For example, the very discussion you
had with Minister Goldsmith yesterday about the number of treaty settlements that
have been landed, and the implementation improvement of the implementation of
those treaty settlement obligations.
That's by far and away better than ever.
That's going really well.
Can I just-
So it's not a binary answer. There are some things that could be better, but
guess what?
In the previous government,
they were banned from going to the NICF as well.
So what things could be better? What is the feedback you're receiving
on where-
You know what? I tell you one thing that could be better
... the Crown is failing Maori.
No, no. Where legislation is failing Maori, because Maori want to activate
massively in the economic space, but the RMA and the DOC acts are constraining them
severely from actually running business.
That's definitely one space that most Iwi absolutely agree with me
and this government on. They want to be unleashed
for economic development rather than being constrained by all the red tape and
green tape that continues to malign our economy.
Can I just clarify? You have not received any feedback from the
broader community
that
Maori feel under unrelenting assault
by this government?
Well, there's feedback like that under probably the last 180 years of
government. I'd, uh-
But you're not responsible for the last 180 years, Tama
... No, but that's what you're putting on me.
What I'm saying is, put it in a context
where Maori have felt to be adjacent, some Maori have felt to be
adjacent to the direction of travel to the government.
For me to generalize to say all Maori feel like that or most Maori feel like that,
I think is very, very premature.
Are you connected or are you not?
More than you.
Sure. So how come you're not receiving it? We're receiving it.
No, no, no. What I'm receiving-
I'm just saying that-
What I'm, the advice and the-
Because the-
... communications I'm getting is, "Minister, you're doing a magnificent job
to continue to remain positive about Maori health and wellbeing, to uplift the
Maori economy and to do good things with this vote." Obviously, you're not in those
conversations.
Right. Do you think they are tired?
We have a structured agenda for the sake of the efficiency of getting across the
areas that are important to our committee.
We had over 30 minutes this morning and just had another 10 minutes on
the same kaupapa, which was from the very first question that was asked.
Yeah.
I think we've traversed this area enough.
I'd like us as a committee to now start to traverse some of the other areas
that are important to us as we identified in the structured agenda.
So-
Good. Can you give us some guidance on which those are now?
Uh, well, I think we've covered the first part of the agenda very,
very well.
Well, what do you want me to start on the Nelson tense that-
So we have governable-
... this government's failed to deliver to this day
... accountability settings and outcomes-
After the labor
government fended the Nelson tense owner, Steven, for years.
It is-
You want to start on that one?
Yep. Let's do that with my primary.
It is. Okay, so we've got a primary here from Grant.
Yeah.
I thought we were doing supps still on this, no? We're not?
No, we're not. I've decided that we've canvassed that well enough, and we need to
move on.
Okay. You don't want to talk about the Nelson tense of the labor government
offended-
No, let's, let's not-
... it for years.
I-
And no one supported except the National led government.
Minister.
Could I talk about party matua, Kia Kua, Nelson tense.
Can you talk through that please?
Okay. So for many years-
Oh, thanks
... the labor government, labor led government, and a majority labor led government
denied progress of the Nelson tense claims. They said, "No.
We'll go and use your boardroom, but we won't actually resolve your claims."
This government, with the help of the Mercurial Judith Collins-
That's because you got the report
... her lady actually delivered a resolution.
Moving on.
Good news.
Supps on-
Yeah. Good news. Great news
... no, Nelson.
And I expect your support on the legislation.
Oh, actually, it's a sup.
Sure.
Supplementary to all of this.
Minister, thank you for being here today.
So as you keep reminding us, there's five particular
responsibilities of a Ministry of Maori Development,
and part of it is promoting increases in levels of achievement
attained by Maori with respect to education, training and employment, health,
economic resource development. Just a friendly reminder.
So, Minister, can you please give us some examples
how
Maori are given increased investment
outcomes in... Pardon me
What examples can you give with respect to increasing investment for
Maori from other agencies, since we're being given this
avalanche that apparently there's nothing for our Maori?
Just a few examples.
He won't be able to give you one.
Because the ministry-
If I want to take the-
The ministry, again, part of the responsibility is to-
Like that Ara Whakahihi capability fund
that has enabled more Maori businesses to invest in research and
technology or the biodiscovery platform that Minister Shane Reti and I
were part of announcing last year at Hills Laboratory in the great and
aspirational electorate of Hamilton West.
Or indeed, the aquaculture settlements and the monies that are set aside, or even
last week we're at field days. Didn't see many of you there. Not for long.
Excuse me.
Where we announced the support for-
They don't like us much
... for PKW Incorporation.
$1.2 million to enable solar array on
Waimate Plains or the orchards of the Te Arawa Primary Sector
Partnership group, $2.6 million that Todd McClay and I announced.
Didn't see you at the announcement actually, Steve.
Or indeed, some of the work that's been undertaken
by Erica Stanford in making sure that there's a whole range of literacy and
numeracy materials, resources that are in te reo Maori that
have now been used to populate kura and wharekura throughout the
country. There's a whole range of...
Oh, and also that support given to Koanga Reo around property maintenance.
There's a whole range of initiatives that have been
launched into the Maori
space, and that's happened over the last couple of budgets.
Of course, one of the biggest ones, which I mentioned before, is making sure that
people's tax actually, people's money and the money that they earn stays in their
pockets rather than being taxed by the government to be spent on all sorts
of activities that may not impact on most people's lives.
So Minister, with respect to the solar panels announcement that
was made very recently, so what does that mean
on ground level for Maori?
Well, what that means is that you can have more resilience in an area known
as South Taranaki, and they can also generate some economic wealth and
gain, just like down the road from that, Ormstid Road, where Regional
Infrastructure Fund has co-invested some pūtea as a loan
to Ormstid 7A to build a dairy shed to enable
far greater profitability and productivity on that land and better
encourage exports off that land in South Taranaki.
They've got an old shed that didn't work.
RF said, "Let's lend you some money so you can build a new dairy
shed. You can then improve your productivity, profitability, and you can pay it
back." That's actually what I call progress.
Thanks, Minister.
Not a supplementary, but a new pātai.
Ka pai.
Coming back to the program, I would like to ask a pātai about housing
specifically.
For housing.
Knowing that home level-
Oh, sorry, housing?
Yeah.
Oh, we'll do housing this afternoon.
Oh, that's after dinner.
Sorry.
Okay. Let's go back then. Supplementary for accountability.
Prior to the break, we were talking about
TPK. Your mahi is to advocate for Maori.
It's not necessarily you need to do the mahi, but it's about strategy,
leadership, promotion, repo.
What are the consequences for
agencies who don't turn up or they actually fail to deliver the outcomes that you
advocate on behalf for Maori?
I think what might be useful just in responding comprehensively to that question,
Mr. Chair, is just to
alert the member around the work that Dave and others do alongside
other public service chief executives to ensure that there's a base set of
awareness and responsiveness around issues.
Dave, maybe you talk about that and that liaison that you have throughout the
public service-
You can do this one
... to ensure they are aware of their responsibilities to Maori as citizens.
You can do that.
But also the mahi that's been purported to us.
I can do it. Yeah.
Thank you, Minister.
Yeah.
So the first point is understanding the policy framework that we
use, which is Te Tōtūhe Ora.
Mm-hmm.
And I'll get one of the staff to come and talk to that
shortly. And so that
we're clear in what context we
are operating in, and whether we are working with Maori
as citizens or whether we're working with Maori as
whanau and iwi and hapu members.
And so having a really clear understanding of Maori
policy and how we derive
who we are talking to and what context and what is the
purpose. So that's the first point.
And we've done that by promoting
that policy framework at central agency level, both
in the
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and in the policy project.
So we have a foundation
platform in which to operate on, and also through training and development
through the Leadership and Development Center as well, so that we
roll this out to agencies so they understand clearly
how we are operating.
Mm-hmm.
So that sets the platform. Secondly, we
engage with those agencies to
interrogate the data and monitor their performance.
And we have three performance
groups, if you like. The first is around the government's targets,
the second is around system monitoring, and the third is around
monitoring the treaty settlement commitments.
But if I just go to the policy foundation first, and if
it's okay, just ask Paula to talk to that.
Mm-hmm.
Te Tōtūhe Ora.
Yeah. Kia ora. Kia ora tātou. Kia ora e te tēpu.
So last year we had the opportunity to come and talk to your committee
about Te Tōtūhe Ora.
And since then, from July to December, you might recall we were
piloting the policy framework and really in essence as
Dave has described as-
The conflation of who is Māori, sorry, the
conflation of issues around iwi and Māori and
being able to distinguish the difference and what therefore might
be the appropriate solutions in different cases
was rampant. So there was a whole lot of confusion across the public
service. As Davis pointed out, development of this
policy framework really is an attempt by us to be able to support the
public service, particularly across the policy shops around,
well, if you're identifying a particular issue and it's going to
likely have
impacts on Māori, be clearer around who the
Māori are and for what purpose.
So the piloting of the framework happened
towards the end of last year. Oh, sorry, over the course of
last year. And then this year, as Davis pointed out, we've been much more
intense in offering the training and the workshops, but also the online
modules that are now available. And the great thing about that is that--
So that's kind of total, we've
trained about 500 plus public servants across the
agencies, and that's been
really positive. The feedback that we get is not only are people
much clearer around distinguishing the differences between collective interests and
individual interests and when
this is a citizenship right and when this is a right because they
whakapapa through
Māori,
it's being able to distinguish who they're talking about
and for what purpose. So that's been very positive.
What we then do in addition to supporting public service
agencies is we also use it ourselves as a way of being
able to provide our secondary policy advice.
And again,
there's been
some questions around, well, what was our role in providing advice on different
policies over the term of the government, and what we've
used is the Te Tata Ioro framework to be able to say,
"Again, well, which Māori are you thinking about and for what purpose?" And also
being able to use our free and frank advice function, which is
important as a policy shop to
point out there are particular issues or risks,
or opportunities that might exist if you continue with a particular
policy.
Thank you.
Tena koe, Mr. Chair, if I can. Thank you. I really appreciate those answers.
However, my question is, what, really,
enforcement or accountability measures have been put in place where other
agencies are failing to deliver equitable outcomes for
Māori?
Well, the monitoring of
the agencies in terms of the delivery for outcomes
for Māori is Te Puni Kōkiri's role.
How chief executives'
KPIs are set is the responsibility of the
Public Service Commission.
And so engagement with the Public Service Commission on
how those are set to include their responsibilities
is a
tripartite
engagement between Te Puni Kōkiri and
Public Service Commission and those agencies in question.
How they are held to account is up to the Public Service Commission.
Okay.
Very good.
Is that all right? Are you okay with that?
Can I just get clarity? Yeah.
We did a lot of work on this. We're
quite in-depth with the briefing itself.
I just want real clarity, real understanding.
So the onus really is on the public service, and
not monitoring, but actually being the watchdog.
Who is actually delivering and who's not
equitable outcomes for Māori? Is that not TPK, not the Māori development
minister, but it's actually the Public Service Commission?
Well, if you look at the responsibilities of a
specific agency, they will have their clear responsibilities
like we do, and they'll be expected to deliver those to all
New Zealanders, including Māori.
What we will be able to do, and what we do, is we identify when
it's not occurring at a
comparable level as it is for the rest of New Zealand.
Minister has a right, too, in terms of oversight over all
those agencies. Yes. Yeah. And of course, the minister is advised- Yeah ...
on it as well. Yeah. Sure.
But the Treasury has a role in the appropriate
deployment of public monies at a system
performance level, Dave,
to make sure that those public monies are
used in an appropriate way for the outcomes that have been sought.
Now,
as you heard earlier on, I've got a pretty strong conviction
that there are serious inequalities of outcomes
or opportunities, inequalities of opportunities,
for many cohorts, including a large
cohort of
Māori.
And you see that through some of the disproportionate statistics, particularly
in very basic areas like health and
education. But there's also some successes.
There's also some things that are going wrong.
We, at the regional offices in particular, are very instrumental in
pointing out where there might be some really good performance against some of the
government's targets. So you could say some schools that have a very high
percentage of Māori, maybe 95, 100% Māori, like Te Wharekura o
Kirikiriroa. Now, at one stage they were having 90% attendance,
even though they were essentially
the equivalent of a decile one school. Now, that is unheard of.
But they had a particular way of doing things that ensured that the attendance
was very, very high
I'd love it for all schools to have that, and we've sort of interrogate why is it
at that school there's 90% and around the corner it's 35.
What's going on?
Mm.
And so we have to draw on the eyes and ears of Te Kura Kiri out in the regions and
level here. But also some insights from our kaimahi and
officials that are closer to that action to check,
okay, what lessons can we bring from successful
experiences a la
Te Kura Kiri Kiriroa and bring them to bear in other schools?
Because if
we had 90% attendance rate amongst kids, we'd probably have a higher achievement
rate too.
Mm.
And then you're going to have a better
economy in the future,
better society in the future because those kids will be equipped for the skills to
be organizational
executives or business owners or
charitable organizational leaders.
But at the moment, it's incremental improvement
in terms of attendance and incremental improvements in terms of achievement.
We've got to draw out the good examples and use them as role models.
Okay. I want to now move on to the last area of our structure's agenda
before the lunch break.
Yeah.
Which is the delivery of new functions.
That's with regards to the
services that you now provide at TPK a year and a half or thereabouts
ago.
today. And that's the post treaty settlement, the delivery of treaty settlement
commitments and all that. And Willie, we'll start with you with a primary question,
please.
I
wonder if I--
I really wanted to, if I could, Mr. Chair,
ask just a couple of questions on the
accountability settings and outcomes,
particularly in that tribunal area, if the minister was up for the question
because,
I know that we actually touched on it there, Steve, with it.
But it's just,
Mr. Chair, the
tribunal's seen as holding the Crown accountable for its actions.
But report after report has showed that the Crown has failed in its
obligations to Maori.
Yet the government is also reviewing the
tribunal's role as well.
So how can the committee, and more importantly, Maori have any confidence that the
Crown is being held accountable when the Crown cuts funding to
themselves
in the process and doesn't bother to engage with Maori or the tribunal?
And I just want to ask the minister, because he's right at the center of this.
Where are we with the tribunal, Minister, in terms of its
future?
What's your observations on this?
And there's been
a total attack from, not you, but other ministers with
regards to the tribunal's rights.
I'll respond to that, and also no, Steve and I got into a very
emotional thing early on, so we're all good. Okay.
That's all from the tribunal, not from Steve.
Yeah. Well, no, hang on. There was a bit of crossover. Okay.
So we've always said that there will be a review
of the Treaty of Waitangi Act. That was articulated in the
coalition agreement with New Zealand First.
That review has been commenced. It continues to be under
advice, but the statement
that I've made in the past and continue to make today is the review is not about
the existence of the tribunal, it's about the endurance of the tribunal.
And so we are continuing to take advice on that
matter.
And of course, there continues to be inquiries, some of which
are kaupapa based, some of which are historical based,
and there are many inquiries outstanding.
But I think the other item to be aware of is, I think it's Section
80.
That's the report through to Parliament. Yeah.
So Section 8I of the Treaty of Waitangi Act requires the
minister to present a report to Parliament on an annual basis-
Mm
... around the recommendations of the tribunal, which
very long set of recommendations that have come through, and some of them, of
course, have been carried out and delivered on.
And many of them have not. That's over success of the government.
So-
Mm
... many of them have not. Importantly, on a range of
historical matters, those matters
generally end up in a resolution through a deed of settlement in the treaty claims
process.
Some of the more contemporary matters I think need some further,
what's the word, agility, work in order to deal with some of those
concerns. For example, some of the outcomes of the
tribunal inquiry on housing,
have resulted in some shifts across governments to better enable
Maori housing providers,
and some of which are very credible, and others probably need a bit of a hand up,
to be fair.
So there's no plan to get rid of the tribunal? That's what you're saying.
No, I've never said that. I've never said that.
My-
Thank you
... statement has been... Pardon?
Shane Jones has.
Okay, I'm going to stop you there.
It's always been on the-
Minister, I'm sorry
... endurance, not on the existence of the tribunal
We've only got 15 minutes left and we've got an important area here that I want us
to cover before the break.
I don't need a break in the next break either. I'll just like, power on.
Well, okay, so Georgia, you have a primary question with regards to new functions.
Yeah, we've talked a lot about the $190 million worth of
cuts and also the
Waitangi Tribunal's comments around
Maori achievement and satisfaction under this government.
So my question regarding the delivery of new functions,
is how
are you going to do it? How are you going to, with the
cuts in place, add the additional functions
required within TPK?
How are you going to do all of the things that you're expected to
do or need to do with these new functions being added, considering
there is, in some areas, quite a lot of
distrust in the government's ability to cater
to Maori at a time when we kind of need
as much done as possible. How are you managing that?
Well, again, I just want to start and reject this characterization of 190 million
of cuts. Some of it was time limited.
Just want to make sure that's on the record with the secretary of the committee.
Yeah, but even though it was time limited, it's still those-
But it's not a cut
... those functions are
now being absorbed by the rest of the funding.
But a lot of the time limited cuts was actually
non-departmental that has come off.
So I think we just have to be a bit more discerning around that.
The second thing is that,
in terms of the
functions that were inhaled from Te Ara Whiti, that also came with a bit of
budget.
Mm.
And right now, when you think about the functions that sit under the
iwi Crown Relations portfolio or the iwi Crown Relations mahi within Te Puni
Kōkiri, we are getting through what was expected of us, whether or not
that be the treaty settlement accords, of which I think I'm responsible for
11, and working with various iwi that are part and parcel of those
accords, and also the Parihaka arrangement, which is a little bit different.
We're getting through those, we're following those up, and we're delivering on some
of the
action points very well. There are some that are outstanding-
For sure
... but we are doing that bit. In terms of He Korowai
Whakamana and Te Hautae, which is the
team that's responsible for
following up treaty settlement implementation, well, again, I
think that's gone reasonably well.
Now you've got an increase on the number of obligations that have been carried out
or are on track, and a decrease in the number of serious delivery
issues, of which I think when I arrived there were 10.
Nine.
Yeah. Or nine when it landed. Now there's-
Four
... four. Actually, we're getting through very chunky, difficult issues with Te
Puni Kōkiri often in a leadership role to get through those, some of them through
legislation, some of them through arrangements that we come to
with those partners. So just in terms of that part of the
iwi Crown Relations portfolio, those
items are going really well.
Yes, Dave?
To answer your question, we received those functions in February of last year,
and we had a strategy that was from
2020 to 2024.
And so after we received those functions, we realigned our
strategy.
Mm.
It's the strategy we have now, which is to 2029.
We went from nine focus areas-
Mm
... in the previous strategy, and a number of those were
delivery
programs, delivery
areas like housing, for example.
And we've now moved to the five that you see in front of you now in the
strategy. So part of that was, as I mentioned at the beginning,
taking on more functions,
knowing that
resources were tied, was focusing on our
core responsibility.
And that's our five functions, and then the
five strategic priority areas. That's how we realigned that.
And as I
said at the beginning, and that aligned with the committee's report
in November. So we had to adjust, we changed our strategy, essentially.
Okay. So supplementary just on that.
Sure.
Just around the 10 million that's been
reprioritized out of the Māori Development Fund,
and which I understand is to fund the Te Māori Too trade
relationships through showcasing culture.
Mm.
Yeah.
What are you going to do with the less 10 million in the
Māori Development Fund? How's that going to work?
Well, okay. So I think just to set this up in a
context, many of us will recall what happened with Māori and the huge
exemplar that it set for indigeneity and
museums of significance, like the Metropolitan in St.
Louis, Chicago, and San Francisco,
and the huge impact that it had on our
cultural pride, want of a better term.
There was also some economic and related activity that went with that.
In terms of the allocation, it's over a five-year period, so it's
$2 million per year for five years.
I think that would have a minor impact on the overarching
ability of Te Puni Kōkiri to continue to deliver
the Māori Development Fund in a meaningful and impactful way.
It's only about two out of 40
million.
Okay. Just a supplementary from Paul.
Just a quick one, Minister.
All right.
Te Māori Too,
the initiative-
Yes
... how do you see it
supporting export growth and
trade?
So,
where Te Māori Too is heading is using culture and art as a platform
for not only cultural development, but also economic development.
There is a lethal example of that in the 1980s,
1984 to 1986, when something of a similar nature was
taken to the United States. And
the art exhibition will be used as a magnet, art exhibitions in
museums and other places, to draw
visitors, sometimes of
serious diplomatic and other significance, into these events
where we'll essentially enable export
type activities to surround
those exhibitions.
We also generate, as you might have seen,
huge interest from just people on the ground in Europe.
So there's a waka right now in Leiden in the Netherlands.
It's been there for many years, and it's got serious interest and
participation from Dutch people and others who go and visit that.
So much so that when we went to Waitangi Day this year,
they had, I think it was 10 or 20 Dutch
paddlers all speaking Māori up in Waitangi, who'd
come down for the week to participate in the Waitangi
Week experience,
but also to take some learnings back to their mahi in Leiden.
But Māori culture worldwide, globally is hot Hot for a variety of
reasons, whether or not it's the leadership in the language space or treaty
settlement space, but also in some of the innovation and some of the
superstars that exist across our whanau.
Whether or not it's the people in film like Taika Waititi and Temuera Morrison and
Cliff Curtis and others, or people in music like Alien Weaponry, who has a huge
following in Germany, by the way. They're probably the one organization that's had
the most impact in increasing the number of Maori speakers in Europe, is Alien
Weaponry. I don't know if you know who they are.
They are a Maori heavy metal band.
Okay.
When you see 35,000 Germans-
Oh, yeah
... singing in Maori-
No, no, that's awesome
... you know they have an impact.
That's true.
Okay, so-
I hope to meet them. That's right.
And then you have-- Well, yeah, and Willie and I are going to go have an evening in
Auckland too. But
you have a look at the work that our Maori artists like Fiona Paddington has had
dem- displayed now in the Venice,
Biennale and others from our artistic
cohorts-
That's great
... who are having a huge impact across the world.
You think about Mai Nuku, who's one of the main directors of the Metropolitan
Museum of Art right now.
We, on the art front, on the film, fashion-- film and music
front, hopefully fashion front, and also other things like the way we conduct
our businesses, it has huge appeal for people globally.
Probably more appeal globally than it does sometimes
domestically.
Mm-hmm.
And what I think is that we can go outwards and take
our trade, take our exports, take our goods and services
to a global level, so we're not just selling that to ourselves.
We've got to sell that to the world.
Supplementary.
Oh, supplementary.
Just before you do, just for everybody's clarity, we'll take
your offer of being able to carry on. We will carry on.
Yes.
And we'll finish at 12:30. So we'll go through the remaining parts
of the-
We'll go to 12:45
Hmm?
We can.
Yeah, whatever. I'll just keep on going. Let it flow.
Yeah. So, supplementary.
Supplementary.
Be that as it may,
te reo Maori does rate overseas. It is globally hot,
but locally not.
Something.
That's the other part of that statement.
And there are quite a few
Maori, not just in the te reo Maori communities, but Maori
who have been
fighting for a long time on the ground, grassroots levels,
to revitalize te reo Maori tikanga, to maintain Matauranga Maori within our
Maori spaces, who disagree that $18 million
investment or any investment into promoting
our culture overseas for commercial viability is
actually
harmful to a lack of investment in the culture itself
here back home. Where in this budget and going
forward is there a significant amount of funding
or ring-fence funding to ensure that
what actually makes Maori culture hot globally and anywhere in
the world actually sustainable? It's investing not in the haka
and the photos and that side of it, it's actually in the
very essence of what it means to be Maori.
Okay, so if I
revert back to some of the comments I made earlier, give you a sense.
We've put essentially
$108
million over the last year towards the
revitalization of about 10 to 12 marae.
Now, if we're saying: where's the material contribution
to marae redevelopment? That's one example.
That's a serious investment. That's as big as
the Shane Jones Willie Jackson investment of $96 million
into around 300 marae under the PGF.
So if we get hard into the data-
Mm-hmm
... that's one example. Another example is the literally
hundreds of millions of dollars that continue to be invested through te
reo Maori in schools by Mr. Stanford and under the budget.
Now, you might argue, and I can understand that, that it should be more.
Ka pai. It's okay. Acknowledge that.
Ditto the more than nine-figure
investment through the four Maori language entities,
Te Matawai, Whakaata, Te Mangai Paho, and Te Taura Whiri.
Mm-hmm.
That continues to be over $115 million
per annum and will be some more shortly with that tagged
contingency. I think that's a serious and material
commitment to te reo across those four entities.
Ditto the largest investment ever into kapa haka that
this government laid out in Budget 2024 of about $46 to 48 million.
Now, I think what you're saying is you'd prefer
some PGF to go into individual whanau and individual
hapu. I think that's what you're saying.
Mm-hmm.
To allow them to decide how they spend that money for their purposes.
Is that where your questions are going?
No, not necessarily. It's just-
Can you give me a bit of an example of that?
Yeah. It's really there's concern that there's
investment, yes, and it's needed.
No one's disputing the fact that, yes, it is a great investment, and to Maori
too. However, what the question really is framed around is
getting carried away, I suppose, with the globally hot aspect
of promoting Maoritanga at large,
not te reo Maori, not just haka, but Maori culture in its purest
form on a global stage while Maori back home are suffering.
Well, I don't-
Suffering not just culture-
Mm-hmm
... but
as tangata whenua here at home.
Well, I don't think it's an either/or.
Mm.
I don't think that's you either have one or the other.
And I think part of our approach here is trying
to encourage or facilitate reconnection with
the whenua tupuna. So a great example of that is the Papakāinga
National Environmental Standard, where actually we're just stripping away tape and
saying, "No, no, no. Councils and others, just stay out of it and encourage and
support Maori to build our own houses on our
own land."
Rather than councils getting, and Māori Land Court,
14,000 applications waiting for a decision.
Mm.
Getting all up and tight on what you can do on your own whenua tupu.
Now, my view, and I think the view of my colleagues is just make it easier for
people to do things on their own land.
Sure, you've got to be careful of adverse consequences on their neighbors.
Absolutely, I understand that. But why are Māori
trusts on corporations,
for example, going to the court, waiting two years or three
years for a decision on an uncontested trustee application or reappointment?
Now, I don't think that that's good.
I think that we should have more effective Māori land court, a more efficient Māori
land court. That's my view. Okay? And
that's a matter that Minister McKee has to respond to, because she's in charge of
the courts. All I'm in charge of is Te Tuturu Whenua Māori, not the courts,
and not the operations. So I do think when you
penetrate the
outer layer and you find out what's going on,
you start delineating to center land, language and culture and
other things. You actually find that there are things that are happening, but they
might not necessarily occupy the first news story on Te Ao
Māori News or Te Karere.
Mm.
Because it's not sexy, it's not provocative, it's not going to grab the masses.
But there are steps being taken in order to make sure that we whakatau i tēnei
āhuatanga o tō tātou tuakiritanga, e whakarewa hoki i te
pitomata o tēnā, tēnā tangata.
Tēnā koe.
Kia kaua e riro, ma te pō uruuru te tangotango hoki,
te pitomata o ia tangata e ngaro.
Tēnā koe.
Supplementary from Riemu.
So just a supplementary please, Minister.
So, when we're talking about Māori
and being able to feel things here on the
ground in New Zealand-
Yeah
... being able to stay connected to their whakapapa.
How would the funding and the allowing papakāinga
to be built, because I know that Papakura Marae in my patch in
South Auckland took ages to get the consents
for units to be built there. The pūtea for
Marae restoration,
providing maths and science textbooks in full Māori,
continued contingency for Māori broadcasting.
Would you say that
helps with the kaupapa of
allowing Māori to still feel connected
and be able to hold on to their culture and many other things
as well in terms of health and well-being, or do these not amount to
anything?
No, I think the answer is yes, and
we can be more effective, for example, in partnering with
organizations, whether or not that's iwi or whānau trusts
or Māori organizations, to actually give
more ballast to those initiatives.
I think it's a yes and rather than a yes but.
So whether or not it's
in the wharekura space, making sure that
Rawiri's kura out at Seatoun has got some new capital investment.
That's top of mind. I'd love to do that with a number of schools that are not in a
good shape.
Mm.
And they haven't necessarily been capitalized.
And I don't want to go into the history of the wānanga, how they weren't
capitalized when they got started.
Mm.
The three wānanga that ended up in arrangements.
But there's certainly some areas where, as a government,
Te Puni Kōkiri can help
hold others to account in the adequacy of those services.
We can be more,
not creative, but more deliberate and intentional about
doing the right thing in the right place
for this kaupapa that Oriini has mentioned, the member has mentioned.
So can we do more? Yes. Do we have to be cautious and fiscally responsible?
Mm.
Absolutely.
But do we
say, okay
you can only go so far, and then you have to stay in New Zealand?
I'm not in that camp. But I do think that we have to fix the basics at home.
That's why I'm so much up for fixing the Waioeka Gorge.
That place is shambolic in terms of a road.
If you don't have a road there-
... how are people going to go from Ōpōtiki to Gisborne to visit their whānau or go
to a tangi? What, through Napier and Taupō?
Mm.
So I don't think it's one way. I think it's a yes and, and sometimes we
can actually be more, I suppose, fiscally responsible, efficient with the
spending. As an example, I'll give you another example,
and maybe we'll go into the wards of the housing discussion.
Right now, we have contracted Te Aoreroa Mai, a Ngāti Toa Rangatīra
organization, to build 125 homes.
The leverage that they have to procure that at a better cost
is far higher than if we said a little bit at a time, 10 here,
wait three months, 10 here. So we've said, no, you go and build
125 homes. All of a sudden, because they own part of Switched On,
which provides the electricity and other services, they own part of the ITM, which
provides the wood. All of a sudden, you've got layer on layer, not only of
margin, but importantly efficiency.
Those houses can get built faster.
And actually, the iwi
is better off for it and so is the community.
And what did you say, Minister? That falls under the responsibilities of
promoting increases in the levels of achievement that-
Absolutely. And not only that, it improves the health and well-being
of people when you're living in a dry, warm home in Porirua rather than an old
state house that hasn't been refit for 40 years.
Yeah.
It's like, well, that's night and day.
Mm.
Georgie.
Great.
We've talked a bit about, earlier today we talked about trust and the
importance of trust and transparency, and we know that a key
part of building trust is engagement and consultation.
So my question is around what funding has been
allocated to ensure that
engagement and consultation with iwi and Māori is occurring.
And could you speak specifically to
how many Māori organizations have been engaged with
across different kaupapa?
That's quite an open question. I could speak for eons on that.
But-
Well, I could give you some specifics.
How about you talk specifically about when Whāikainga Whai Oranga
was cut. What did the consultation look like with iwi in
that space?
Well, a lot of those meetings are actually conducted at a national iwi chairs forum
level, along with the pou leadership, the five pou and the iwi chairs forum.
And discussions of that nature are generally held
with the pou chairs and the leadership groups within each of
those pou. So it ain't necessarily we're going to go out and
engage with 100 iwi groups and another 100 Māori
organizations. But rather, sometimes you come at it from more
collective level. It's like Māori agribusiness.
A lot of the engagement would probably turn towards the Federation of
Māori Authorities rather than going out to the 29,000 incorporations and trusts,
which is probably a little bit inefficient to try and do that.
The Tūrangawaewae changes is another example where we've
come up with some ideas. We've bandied it around with a few involved in
the Māori land development space.
I think we talked, did we talk with some of the judiciary about some of these
changes?
Yes.
Yeah, some of the Māori Land Court judiciary around the changes.
And then we went out on a public submissions process, which is essentially engaged
in by many, many Māori individually as trusts and
incorporations and as iwi. So there's a range of different
ways we might engage to get feedback, and sometimes it's before the public
process. Sometimes it's in the private space where we
engage with, as the Tūrangawaewae is a great example.
We might engage with people on
the judiciary
leaders who have some real serious skin in that game.
The likes of the Federation of Māori Authorities and others
before we get public on it. That happens all the time.
And so are you confident
that that process of feedback is adequate?
Or would you like to see changes or improvements in that
space?
I think that sometimes those processes are more
enduring or credible than others.
We could do better in some instances, and sometimes we might go over the top too.
But a great example, not on this portfolio, but another portfolio, is that
basically I wrote to-- Invited two Zoom sessions
with essentially every representative of all the PSGEs.
We wrote to them a couple of times. We've had face-to-face hui.
That's before anything got drafted-
Right
... in terms of amendment bill. So again, I don't think it's a
one size fits all.
Can we be more efficient? Probably.
But the other side of the efficiency coin is called representation,
and you've got to balance that. It can't be all representative, but it can't
be all efficiency. You've got to get the right balance, and it changes depending on
the issue.
Minister, if I could just add to the member's question around Whāikainga Whai
Oranga. Whāikainga Whai Oranga was time-limited funding.
Yeah.
It was 730 million that came in Budget '21.
The role Te Puni Kōkiri played is that we partnered with, um, the Housing and Urban
Development Ministry, um, in order to
identify four prototype partners that would select by
NICM from around the country. Te Puni Kōkiri actually exited that
program in May last year, and that program has continued under,
um, Housing and Urban Development since then. So that funding hasn't been cut.
That funding is in place, but it is time limited.
But it's no longer a Te Puni Kōkiri program.
And I don't know if you know about that, Georgie, the Whāikainga Whai Oranga, and
Willie might ask this question as well or be thinking about it.
The pūtea that was effectively reallocated, um,
ultimately has been used to
cost-proof transitional housing, which is
inevitably and disproportionately filled by Māori,
and also some pūtea into, uh, the 400 houses
announced last year's Waitangi Day
delivered by Māori organizations and some of it
the flexible fund which I expect many Māori to apply to and get support from.
Okay. So can I just come in there because that, I mean, that's
been one of our big questions and
challenges to the minister is that Whāikainga Whai Oranga
absolutely prioritized Māori.
Mm-hmm.
And I've talked this up with your colleague, uh, Minister Bishop.
Uh,
now we have the transfer of, what are we talking about, 700
million?
In terms of, uh, that was originally absolutely targeted
for Māori into this general flexi fund.
Isn't that--
Has that--
And you can clarify this, Grace, 'cause Māori housing providers
have said that the problem with that is that they're competing with
mainstream providers. So, and Minister Bishop acknowledged that to me.
Is that what you've found? What have you found over the last year or two?
Because, you know, we were distraught to see Whāikainga Whai
Oranga dismantled, realizing the minister's got to pick up the pieces
and still find a way to get that pūtea delivered to Māori. I accept that.
But has it become
really, really tough for Māori providers to access that money?
I think we have to remember that Whāikainga Whai Oranga was a prototype
program. So it was never going to address, uh, the
volume of issues across the housing system.
But it was to point to another way of working.
And so the use of those prototype partners was really to identify
alternative ways of devolution and of letting the,
uh, community come up with their own housing solutions.
That 730 million was allocated out.
So the allocation was across not just, um, infrastructure,
but 1,000 homes, repairs, and so on.
That money was allocated. The 1,000 homes were contracted and
are still being delivered.
Why Te Puni Kōkiri exited in May last year was because the money
was all allocated and devolved out to contracted
entities. So the money's not gone.
What we
did with HUD was make sure that the program-
Set up and actually had the money allocated, and now it's in the delivery phase.
What you're referring to, as I understand, in terms of the Flexi Fund, is a HUD
initiative, and that is where their ongoing funding is.
But that's not the Whāikainga Wai Oranga funding.
That was all allocated out.
Sorry, can I-- Because I think we're going into the housing space.
We are.
And we have to be mindful, I think, Mr. Chair.
I do have another role as the Associate Minister of Housing.
Mm.
And I can talk about the Māori housing that's funded through
HUD,
briefly here. I've got to be careful.
The funding that continues within Te Puni Kōkiri right now is around
Whāikainga financial sorted programs
and the repairs. So there's three sort of buckets, let's say,
out of the housing funding. That is different to the Whāikainga Wai
Oranga funding, which Te Puni Kōkiri had some involvement in, which is again
different to the HUD policy, which Grace mentioned just earlier.
What we've found with-
Sorry
... the,
actually, I think the Whāikainga repairs
sort of bit's going very well.
And I think the allocation this year for the new-
House
... Whāikainga houses is 17 million-
17.5
... for 30, 35 homes. 17.5 for 35 homes.
Hopefully, some people, we know,
the Honorable Willie Jackson will actually deliver on those commitments.
We will.
The second-
Come November.
Yes, I'll be kōrero in that new solar panel
arrangement that Minister Watson, Marama Royal have committed to.
In terms of the Māori housing, I mentioned before, under the previous government,
Whāikainga Wai Oranga, there were 1,050 homes, of which
750 have been built, and the prototypes were supported.
A couple of those prototypes have actually gone beyond just
Whāikainga Wai Oranga funding and are attracting support from other players,
whether or not it be the Community Housing Funding Agency
or charitable players, banks, and others. Okay?
Three hundred to go. That was three years ago.
But there's still 300 to go.
And in the programs that we have been responsible for,
in the delivery, it's about 900 to 1,000 homes.
A hundred have been finished, another 900 to go.
So I think there's a big runway for those providers to continue.
One great outcome, I think, of the work that was
previously undertaken, and it has been carried on under us, was that a couple of
those community housing providers have now elevated themselves to what I call
mainstream funding.
And Te Ao Hou is a good example of that.
But that's not the only-
Minister, how many Māori providers are missing out with the change,
except that you've continued with some of the work that we put in place?
Well, I believe credible Māori providers who can deliver in a timely manner,
like you say, under budget and before time, continue to be
supported.
There are about
25, 30 community
housing providers that are Māori.
I can't tell you the exact number that are continuing to be funded
by
budget. But it's not one or two. There's quite a few.
Whether or not it's Tupou- ... Reo Moana or
Whakata,
Whakata
2B7D that just built some more in, um, Rototuna and are opening
them today, I think. Ray Morrison and
current Ngati Whakaue,
and many, many others.
I think that some have struggled.
I know that at least one of the main
prototypes had
been given support of up to 45 mil, and it delivered 21
houses in four years. I think there's some work ons, but they will deliver.
And can I ask, Grace, are you saying that with the
disbandment of Whāikainga Wai Oranga, it hasn't
really affected Māori as initially was
thought. Is that what you're saying?
No, no. I think-
No
... it hasn't been disbanded. The program is being delivered.
So the funding was all allocated. It's all contracted.
It's now in, still in the delivery phase.
I think Whāikainga Wai Oranga was a success,
particularly in relation to demonstrating alternative ways of delivery.
And if we think about Toitū Te Irirangi, for example, who we supported
to establish their housing approach.
When the cyclone hit, they were able to pivot and move into cabins work,
and then they strengthened their approach-
Which has been very successful
... and then they strengthened their approach around building their cadet
capability and bringing through apprenticeships and taking more of an employment
focus. So there have been a lot of ways in which the Whāikainga Wai Oranga
initiative has
generated
different ways of operating and different ways in which Māori communities
can take the reins and deliver for themselves.
I think you're great. This is a good point, because one of the issues that happened
in Gisborne is the Duncan Mill closed down. Remember that?
Mm-hmm.
It was just at the end of 2023, and Te Puni Kōkiri saw
the capability that Toitū had with the mahi it was doing on the housing,
supported them to help some people who had been made redundant, essentially, get
some jobs in both housing and the food production-
Mm-hmm
... primary sect industry out there.
That was because of the context that they had generated through housing, but also
the go-forward momentum that people like
our Tuakana or our Te Ao often bring to this type of
situation. I won't mention his political affiliations now.
So-
Better not
... that's a great, great... Well, I'm sure you'll be talking.
Maybe.
That's a great example where the housing providers have tilted, and they've
also put their hands up to be a commissioning agency around social
investment. Fantastic. Brilliant, because if we can get housing working
alongside and with provision of social investment
or social services, that is a far more enduring
and credible pathway to building communities than just putting a house there and
saying, "See you later."
Mm.
In my view
That is a good example of whānau-centered locally led government enabled.
Absolutely.
And if you look at Te Puni Kōkiri's role, and you were central to that-
No
... Mr. Jackson.
Te Puni Kōkiri's role at that point, it was a decision whether or not
to go in with housing.
Mm.
Because remember, if we go in with housing, we did that.
We were right next to HUD.
We can't monitor them.
No.
So we went in there, established the prototypes with them, and
all credit to them, they continued with those prototypes, and Kaupapa Ora
and-
Kaupapa Ora
... Toitū te Tai Rāwhiti are really good examples of what has
happened, and they are there now. They are well established.
But there's quite an opportunity cost for us to do that.
Mm.
I'm not saying that's not worth doing, I'm just saying it-
There's an opportunity cost
... there's things you can't do other things.
I think what we did, and I know the minister would've supported it
too, was we were able to turn something around,
and TPK played a major part, a huge part in that because we
were not just reduced to doing papakāinga
strategies, right?
Yeah.
That's right. The ministers carried a lot of that work on. I acknowledge that.
And my worry is, and our worry, is the
problem when Māori providers are contesting with mainstream
providers, and
I think that's-
Yeah.
And yes, some of them are s- Willie and them will always, Jamie, they're always
going to be successful, but it's always going to be is it going to just be a Willie
and Jamie,
who are, as we know, leaders in their own right. That's the problem.
But if you strip away the
commentary from that, what you might find is that with some of the
providers they are...
Oh, thank you. Yes, and welcome after these hard questions from me.
Some of these providers
have got their own teams, and they're off and running, and they've got a
whole bunch of SMEs, procurement,
who are owned by whānau own businesses. Toitū's a great example of that.
Yeah.
Whereas others take a slightly different approach,
and they might
partner with a builder or a
crane company. So Middlemore is an example of that.
Mm.
It's a great example, and you know all about this place because it's a wonderful
place, the Middlemore development, where they used the land for housing,
got that from Nai Ti, and some of it was sold to our mate out
west,
who then said he wanted to build an upright, a five, six
story building. We came in with a bit of pūtea on the social
IRS funding and a little bit of the affordable monies, but he's
contracting a tier three Pākehā business to actually do
that build. Actually, that's okay as long as we get the result and we get people
ultimately into those homes because they need them, and the support that wraps
around them. So again, I don't think it's a one size fits all in the
housing provision space for Māori, but I do think that there are some that have,
I don't call it outperformed, but that delivered in a quite a
sustainable way.
Yeah, and it's not only in the rural areas. Finally, the Flexi Fund.
The way the Flexi Fund has been set up is to allocate across areas
of serious need, housing need, and deprivation
predominantly where there are high proportions of Māori with housing
deprivation. So we're talking about Te Tai Rāwhiti, Te Moana-a-Toi, Te Tai
Tokerau, South Auckland, Hamilton, a couple of other places.
Can I-
We're in the areas of housing. Go ahead, Jackie.
But I've got a supplementary on this one.
Oh, sorry.
I've got a housing one too. My primary is housing, so.
Yeah. I'll take the supplementary, and then I'll come to you.
Go with.
Just a supplementary, minister.
Yes.
And thank you, Grace, for clarifying that those funds were time
limited, and they were linked to the development of a
prototype. There seems to be
a lot of back and forth and clarification that
funds were time limited. Minister or
Grace, can someone please just, for the benefit of our listeners,
explain what time limited funding is-
Yes
... and why
they're initiated to begin with?
Grace might be best placed to describe that.
Yeah, sure. So, as I said, Budget '21, Whakangaia Wai
ōranga, $730 million. That $730 million
was for a four-year period, so that meant that we had a
phased approach of a spending profile over four years of
how that money would be allocated.
And housing is always slightly difficult because it doesn't fall
neatly into a
financial year. But what it essentially means is that by the end of the fourth
year, that money has to have been committed and spent.
And so, there is no commitment of ongoing money at the end of that four-year
period.
So just clarifying, as an agency with these time limited
funds in various areas,
have you ever had an expectation that they'd become baseline?
Oh, well, those are decisions that obviously get made by ministers.
But when budget funding comes in and it's time limited,
it usually is for a specific project or initiative or to try something
new and different, which was the case with Whakangaia Wai ōranga.
It was to demonstrate that there are alternative ways for the
housing system to operate, and it delivered successfully on that.
And it could be baseline, right? Could you?
It could.
It could be baseline.
Or aspects of it because there were-- Whakangaia Wai ōranga, we talk about housing,
but there were a number of different components to it.
Actually, you got to remember, Whakangaia Wai ōranga and a range of these programs,
they don't happen in a vacuum. Like if you think about the land up on
Wharanoa Rise, just behind the Rotorua airport at Ōwhata.
We looked at that land when I was working with Super Fund to turn it into a
retirement village seven years ago.
I went there.
Okay, you've been there. And
beautiful land and quite handy to a beautiful part of the country,
the Lakes District.
The housing development would never have happened up there unless the previous
government with Shane invested into Ngāi Road and widened that
road. It would never have been able to happen like it's happened. Mm-hmm.
So often these things take place over governments and
over different agencies, and over time you can't just say, "Oh, that's how
it worked because we put that money into time-limited funding, and that's why Ray
Morrison built those houses." No.
There's these other pieces of the jigsaw, and we're
trying to do that in some ways with things like these regional city
deals. We're trying to get some of the jigsaws in place, particularly around
infrastructure.
Not only around infrastructure, but particularly around infrastructure to make sure
that other developments like business, like housing, like the Totika
Industrial Park, can have the relevant roading network in
place so we don't spend an hour trying to get over the Kaimai Range and we can get
home faster. Yeah. Okay, so I think
if we understand it in a context and an ecosystem, that's a better way than
just saying, "That's there, that's what it is. There's nothing else to it." Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Ray would never been able to build what he's built- That's right ...
Morrison, without Tingai Road. That's right. And ditto up in Auckland. Mm-hmm.
I just announced something called Predator Free 2050 out in Auckland and the
Islands. Well, we're never going to, Steve will know about this, we're never going
to get a healthy Ponsonby unless we get rid of all those rats.
Jeez.
Steve
It's calling the IPAT rats now.
Calling it out. Calling them in.
Whether it's baseline or
time-limited,
the practical effect of the budget allocation that you
have for
housing now is
34 million
for '26, '27. The same as '25, '27.
Yep.
'25, '26. So that's effectively
locked in
reductions.
They've remained embedded.
You have not chosen to
establish baseline funding or time-limited funding
that is substantial enough to deal with
the fact we have the highest rates of homelessness that we have
ever had.
Who said that?
Stats NZ.
It's-
I can read the figures to you if you like.
In fact, Stats NZ is probably out of date on their figures because they're from
2023, 112,000.
So it's out during the time of the previous government.
Okay.
And homelessness has got worse since then.
Mm-hmm. Has it?
Absolutely.
Standard reports are saying in different cities.
So do you disagree that we have 5,000 New
Zealanders without shelter right now, 112,000 in
severe housing deprivation.
Half of those people without shelter are under 24 years old.
Mm-hmm.
And a third are Maori.
Well, I think we have to be careful not to mix the coffee up with the kombucha.
Okay, so hang on-
No. Just unwind that. And homelessness, the way it's been defined
in the census is across different dimensions.
One is emergency housing.
One of those dimensions is emergency housing, and those numbers have come down.
And there's severe housing deprivation category.
No. There's various categories under that rubric.
One is emergency housing, and as you know, 3,000 kids have come out of
emergency housing in the last three years. What a wonderful success.
Number two is those that are living in an inhabitable
housing. They might be-
That's right
... in a house, but it might not have water, it might not have electricity.
All sorts of things.
Yep.
Number three is an overcrowding situation.
Mm-hmm.
There's a lot of that going on.
Yep.
And we know about that, particularly in some of the urban areas particularly.
And number four is living without shelter.
Yes.
Now, on the living without shelter front, and this is something that maybe you'll
come into the housing meeting this afternoon around, there's variability
across cities.
Yes.
There's been a huge reduction in Auckland.
There'll be a report coming out about that very shortly that shows that the
numbers that were on, for example, Housing First,
come down massively because of the actions that were taken.
Now, if you look at the emergency housing list from 2023, there
was about 1,300 whanau Maori on that list. Now there's about 287.
So on that category, that number has come down.
On the other categories,
the availability of tier one data is very scant.
The census is often held up as the main form of data gathering.
Mm-hmm.
The last one was in 2023. And we have to learn how do you best
credentialize numbers. One of the numbers in one of the reports, for
example, was how many phone calls the council got about people who are living on
the street, and that was used as the number to report.
What are your figures on what the housing deprivation is?
Housing deprivation?
Yeah.
There's a variety-
And without shelter.
There's a variety of figures, but there's no tier one reporting on that
except for census reporting.
So you don't have figures on it?
We have reports and data. We have a definite figure on
emergency housing.
Mm-hmm.
That is known because of the number of emergency housing grants, and of course,
coming down from $36 million per month to 3 million, I think it's a
success. That's what I think, because then you can use that money for outreach.
You can use that money to fund our mate, Aaron.
You can use that money for Mahera Matahuruhuru, or Barbara Brown, or Kai
Whitsuka.
But those other ones, they are hard to penetrate at a tier one data level.
Do you accept that there's a disproportionate number of Maori affected
by severe housing deprivation?
Yes, I do.
Yes. So-
Yes, I definitely acknowledge that, and that's why I'm
right up with the housing providers, the Maori housing providers, to make sure that
they are engaged with those that are seriously deprived
for housing. And we're not just building a house on a papakainga
for someone that goes home once a month to crash there in a three-bedroom
house.
So-
Which sometimes, I think is a problem.
So in that regard
, given that we have
major issues of
Housing deprivation-
Yep
... where we rate amongst the worst in the OECD-
Mm
... for homelessness and housing deprivation.
That's-
Yeah
... I mean, that's the reality of it.
Yeah.
How do you justify or how do you
put forward a budget
in the Māori housing space that doesn't
directly address that problem? Where you're putting for a
figure of 34 million for the last two budgets.
But I think-
When the previous ambition, whether it was timely or not,
was 182 million effectively-
Yeah
... for each year over four years.
So-
There's a major reduction in investment-
Yeah
... in addressing that critical problem where we are peculiar in the
world for how badly we do.
Yeah. No, mate, if you've been to Vancouver and seen what happens on East Hastings
Street-
Mm
... the number of people who are living literally on the street.
That's-
It's a lot worse than I've seen anywhere in New Zealand.
I'll tell you that straight up right now.
But I think there's a disconnect here because what we've
got still,
all the funding,
there's over 1,000 houses that are yet to be built
within the Māori housing space. That's just in the Māori housing space
under Whai Kāinga, Whai Oranga. There's still
over 1,000, I think it's 900, 300, 1,200
homes to be built.
There's a long runway to go. That's going to take a couple of years.
And my expectation, as I'm sure will be yours, that many of those houses that are
being built are really being built for people in serious need
and with the right typology,
and the right location.
The second thing is there's a whole range of initiatives around community house
provision,
many of which I expect will be built for those very people, Māori,
who are housing deprived, as well as other citizens that are housing
deprived. The third thing is, Kāinga Ora continues to build
housing.
They continue to build housing now.
Kāinga Ora are building houses in Hamilton right now and opening them up.
Those need to be engaged with people who are seriously housing deprived or on the
social housing register. The fourth thing is there's an inordinate amount of money
that's been put through transitional housing first and a whole range of other
initiatives, much of which is actually directly engaged with
Māori who are living in a pretty difficult place, difficult space.
Where I'm coming to is, I think we can work the system a lot
better to deliver on the housing needs of many people,
many of whom are Māori, who have serious housing deprivation.
We haven't perfected that by any stretch of the imagination,
but there's a lot pūtea in the system that has to be executed on
in order to deliver on these disproportionate needs of Māori.
But those who are seriously housing deprived and wrapped around with the type of
Whānau Ora kaupapa that we were describing yesterday.
That's why I'm so engaged and enthused by Māori housing
providers and others like Emerge, like the Sally's, that
bring with them social service and Whānau wraparound rather
than just building a house. Just building a house with the
mojo of KO.
That's okay. That works. But it doesn't have the type of
solution that you need for people that are in a position like you've described.
What we do know, for sure,
is that those that have the most serious housing deprivation, it's not
just about bricks and mortar.
Mm.
It's actually about a whole range of challenges.
It doesn't add up, Steve, that's what you're saying, right?
Yeah.
The numbers don't add up.
Which numbers?
Yeah. Can I go to a final supplement?
He's supp- in the sup here. Yeah. Go.
What advice have you received on the broader cost to
society and the economy of
support needed for people who have been left to
fall off the cliff and end up in those severe states of housing
deprivation-
Well-
... or homelessness.
Yeah.
Versus the investment
ahead of time to make sure that their
needs can be met rather than
the catastrophe for them, both at a personal level, but for us at a broader
societal level-
Mm
... being dealt with down the track, including-
Yeah
... negative health outcomes, including
all sorts of negative outcomes.
So I get advice, often unsolicited too, from a range of
sources, including those that are right at the hard end of serious
housing deprivation. People like Julie Nelson at the Wise Group, people like
Barbara Brown at Ka Whītuke Tu Kāe, or your mate Lisa down at
VisionWest,
who I understand is building a lot of houses right now for the very people you
describe.
Don't ever think that building a house and saying to someone who's in a
difficult homeless situation-
Sure
... "Move in and you're going to be fine.
Everything's going to happen."
No one's saying that.
There is serious pūtea that's invested through Lisa, Barbara, and
others to help people get off the street and into, let's say, a Housing First
scenario or transitional Housing First scenario.
It will be reported later on today.
The Housing First 300 that Mr. Bishop and I announced in September last year,
and as a result of our work on that and holding providers to account
for places that they have funded under Housing First, has resulted
in 650 or more people come out of the Housing First program,
predominantly off the street, into a Housing First
funded place.
Another couple of hundred off the street into transitional housing through better
practices by MSD. Better BAU, tactical BAU, is what's
described it as. So is it perfect? Are
we meeting the housing needs of everyone? No.
No, definitely not. Are we trying to tune the system a way that better
serves and supports those that do have housing need amongst another
element needs?
I think we are. I think, and I think it's going a bit better than it
was
Do we think putting a whole bunch more money in Dave's hands and saying, "Go
forth and multiply through Whaikāinga Whaoranga 2.0," is going
to be better? That's not the choice that we've made.
But we do need to hold MHUD and KO and
others
to the fire and say, "Hey, are you really serving the needs of
those that have serious housing deprivation?"
Supplementary.
Yes.
I'm just delving deeper into that very profound comment you made,
Minister. That it's not just about roofs and mortar.
That a lot of the people that find themselves in extreme housing deprivation-
Yes, and you know these people, Rima
... 100%, actually come with extreme mental health issues,
issues around violence in the home, things like that.
So Minister, in going back to the
responsibilities of
the Ministry of Māori Development in promoting increased levels
around health as well,
would you say again, the holistic approach
of the government with respect to putting more funding for
police, more funding for corrections, more funding in the justice sector,
because we know most of our victims are Māori,
helps addressing these needs as well which lead to
housing deprivation?
Absolutely. And actually, having that done in a way that's evidenced
and data-driven is also very, very helpful because then we can have
better insights as to the interventions or the supports and scaffolds
required on multiple
fronts, not just the housing front, to move the dial for those
whānau. If you think about the work that Matt Doocey's been doing as the minister,
as the crusader supporting minister of mental health,
and the work he's been doing to open what are essentially hangī
oracle cafes up and down the country. I think that's huge work.
That's got a massive impact on whānau that are really struggling and
often living in difficult and dangerous situations.
So
I don't think it's a one agency will solve it.
I think the role of Te Puni Kōkiri ultimately is to, where suitable,
make sure that we hold the likes of HUD, Te Tuāpapa Kurawakainga,
and others to account for delivering against the
disproportionate needs that some Māori communities have for
housing. But it can't be a one-way street.
It has to be multiple way with mental health and other places involved.
Right. We'll be moving to Whānau Māori shortly.
This will be the last supplementary.
I just want to just to summarize, so we've all talked about the success of
Whaikāinga Whaoranga.
But let's be clear. You cut Whaikāinga Whaoranga. It's been cut.
Just look on the MHUD website. Cut May
2025. So I'm not sure why you're saying, "Oh, it's still
going," because it's officially been cut.
It delivered $7 for every $1 invested.
So it's cut, correct or not?
The Whaikāinga Whaoranga program and the tail of that program is going to
take a couple of years to actually deploy and deliver on.
Right. No, I'm aware of that. But what I-
So the tail of that program is yet to be delivered.
Yeah, I've got that. So given how successful it is, has been,
why did you cut it?
Well, some of the delivery has been very, very successful.
A couple of others have had some challenges, as I've described.
And we've still got to get through another 1,200 houses.
So if you think about the total houses that were committed under the previous
government and this government, we've still got 60% of those to deliver.
But if you think about-
We've still got 60% to deliver
... if you think about the funding though, Minister.
Yeah.
The problem we have in terms of Māori, as a Māori minister, is we always
have a shortage of baseline funding. Always.
Doesn't matter whether it's broadcasting, which we'll come to shortly.
Oh, yeah.
Housing.
Can't wait.
Health. All those areas will always have a shortage
of funding. So you get a program in.
Bryce has talked about the success of it.
Mm.
That gives you an opportunity to baseline that funding.
You missed the mark in terms of baselining that funding.
No, I appreciate that opinion. I don't agree with it, but I appreciate it.
No, but you missed the mark.
I think-
And because that's the challenge for us all, isn't it?
That we can only, Māori can only get temporary funding because we have to
prove ourselves 20 times over. We prove ourselves
and then that area does not
get baseline funding.
No, I appreciate-
I'm not blaming the minister, I'm just saying the government says that the minister
will... And he's already said he advocates for it.
Government says, "No, that's not a priority, Minister."
No, that's a chestnut narrative, and I acknowledge it.
But I think also we have to make sure that Te Puni Kōkiri in its role
and functions is absolutely lethal and ruthless around holding other
agencies to account. Now, I think we're building on that, and we've got a bit of
runway to do that. But that's what the role of the organization
is. It's not to be at all times a manager of
pilot programs that any minister, you, me, or others
might think up from time to time. It can do that now and again.
But if it does too much of that, the actual statutory role and
function-
Mm-hmm
... the one that the cabinet's approved, the one that you guys have endorsed, the
one that's set out in the strategic intentions document, gets severely
compromised.
So my expectation and diagnosis
is that we are
brutally honest with our peers, with other agencies, and
particularly with PSC and Treasury.
Okay, last, last question on this.
Tena koe, Minister.
Tena koe.
Homelessness. I go back to what my colleague here, Steve, was
raising about Māori being over-represented in the homelessness statistics.
Yes. Very sad.
And they are arguable because there is no robust system that
exists-
No, it's very sad
... that can actually find our people
And not just Māori, but New Zealanders that are living rough out on the streets.
But recent reports from the people that you talk to directly,
the Waitangi Tribunal has delivered its report, the 2023, on what
the Crown is lacking, for want of a better word,
in terms of delivering on its obligations to Māori
under Te Tiriti o Waitangi. So the question really is...
Well, before I get to the question,
the feedback within Tāmaki Makaurau, amongst the housing providers there, as I'm
sure you are aware, is they do want more investment in Housing
First. Housing First works-
Yeah
... for many of our providers out there. So is there more?
Does this budget actually reflect more investment into Housing First?
This government did make mention, and actually
firmly state, that it's cutting emergency housing.
With the issue of homelessness right now.
Yeah.
We've gotten rid of emergency housing.
There's limits of transitional house, if any.
We are building new ones. Meanwhile, there are literally
babies on the streets. There are moms and dads on the streets.
So what is this budget actually telling us that it's going
to urgently remedy some of the homelessness crisis that
is being experienced across Aotearoa?
I think, look, you raised a number of issues.
I just want to step back a little bit and just acknowledge that today the
Homelessness Insights report has been released on the website.
Mm-hmm.
That will show variability in results today compared to three or six
months ago. Some up, some down in terms of the number of people effectively
sleeping rough. Different cities have different places.
The second thing was released was some additional outreach support monies
that have been provided for the four main locations, Hamilton, number one,
Auckland, Christchurch, and Wellington.
But also additional locations, Whakatane, Waimakariri,
Whanganui, Napier, New Plymouth, Tauranga,
Springdale. Those locations. So there's been some additional pūtea that's
been forwarded into those locations as well
to basically provide better outreach and transitional support for families in those
urban locations. Not to say those are the only places. There's plenty of places.
The next thing I'd say is that we are confronted, I think all of
us, over time by people who are living rough, often not because of
policy decisions per se, but because of the circumstances they're in.
A wide range of circumstances, especially whānau disconnection, but
also some of these mental health and other challenges that go with folks that
are struggling.
I'm really disturbed around kids living on the street.
Don't like to hear about that, or pregnant moms who are living in very difficult
situations. We have not cut emergency housing, but
we've been very clear about what the criteria are for
emergency housing, and also been hugely proactive
about
transitioning whānau with kids out of emergency
housing into
social housing or, at times, transitional private.
The final thing I'd say, that's 3,000 kids reduction,
and 2,500 of which came out through Priority 1.
The final thing I'd say is this. Most of the homes built in this country are
private homes. They're not funded by the Crown.
They're not funded by iwi entities or others.
I'm talking the vast majority.
And part of our mojo is to make sure that you have the legislative framework to
build houses in a manner that doesn't break the bank for people
who want to live in them,
either as buyers or as renters.
Mm-hmm.
And that's why we've been so focused on changing up the Resource Management Act,
some of these regional dealings with the zoning and consenting
arrangements. So actually developers and others can get on and build
things.
You see a whole bunch of housing developments going through the fast track, some of
which are Māori owned, like out at Riverhead, Ngāi Tai,
or down south with
Ngāti Koata and the Mai Tahi village.
Those fast track residential developments have been driven
by iwi entities, Te Kawerau a Maki and Ngāti Koata.
So I think there's a range of
actions that we've been very deliberate on to try and support people with
housing needs,
most of whom want to live in their own home or in a place where it's
affordable rent.
Very hard right now.
Mm-hmm.
Hence why some of the changes that we made
to the Residential Tenancies Act, we think makes it easier
for landlords to rent to people who have had some
history of
challenges with renting.
We think those changes made to the RTA makes it easier
for landlords to do that, and what we've seen in the last year or
two is a stabilization of rent in most of the big cities, rather
than the massive volatility, generally upwards, that we inhaled over a few
years prior to the last year or two.
So
there's a whole range of things that are going on, proactive
steps. For the purposes of this portfolio, it's incumbent for us to
deliver on the Papakāinga funding, make sure those get done, and also to hold
HUD and others-
Yeah
... to account.
Yeah.
Can I just add to that?
Yes.
The discussion around housing and homelessness, I understand why that
has come-
Yeah
... come through in this select committee hearing.
But I just want to be really clear, neither of those functions are Te Puni Kōkiri's
functions. Our budget doesn't cover that.
And from your own report, you're clear
about what we should be focused on in regards to our core functions.
I just wanted to make that point.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
I think that's a very good point, and I think it's the fuzziness of the line of
us just looking for good outcomes for Māori and how
you can have an effect on actually producing that.
But I take that point very clearly.
I want to move now on to Whānau Māori please, and-
Whānau Māori.
Yep. And I want to ask initially,
well, talk about some of the initiatives that you have
going and also how you're measuring the progress on those
fronts.
Okay. So in terms of legislation, there's a multi-purposes bill,
one that's going through the process.
I think it's gone through the first reading-
Mm-hmm
... and it's awaiting second reading, and that's really bits and bobs, technical
amendments.
Nothing massive. We are working on some other matters,
particularly around the
ability of the Māori trustee to do what she or he needs to do
in order to, call it, be flexible with the funds that it
has to support Māori economic development and Māori land development.
And there's a couple of other matters in that bill that, or the work that's going
on to have a second Māori purposes bill.
The third thing is the Türe Whenua,
and some of the changes that were being proposed through the submissions
process. There was some opposition to some things, and
one or two things that we think could be very helpful to give a bit more
flexibility to organizations who have their own, I suppose let's
call it, for want of a better term, manamotuhake, to do their own thing instead of
having to run back to the court all the time to ask for a judicial stamp.
Yes, you can do that. Now,
I think that's a good thing.
Others don't. Others would like to see our organizations
at the beck and call of the Māori Land Court. Okay, ka pai.
We have different views, and that's okay.
The fourth thing is some of the pūtea and support that
Te Puni Kōkiri has given. Karen is here. She could talk to many of those issues.
The type of support we're giving to uplift the productivity of Māori land and
actually drive towards more exports and trade of products
and goods out of Māori land development.
Now, that's had some real good ballast.
Not just land actually, it's aquaculture as well.
We gave some support last week to Ākaroa King Salmon down in
the Banks Peninsula, Te Pā o Rākaihautū.
Mm-hmm.
So they could increase their productivity, jobs, and exports.
Finally, there is a
discussion going on around legislation surrounding
PSGs and the jurisdiction of the Māori Land Court to
consider issues arising with PSGs and their
exercise of whenua management and actually just general
administration. So we've been out to engage with
PSGs, understand whether or not they want the Māori Land Court jurisdiction to
reign supreme over their operations and governance,
or if they want to be exempted
from that arrangement because that's not what they bought
into when they signed up to settlements
over the last 30 years.
Ka pai? Papakāinga talk. Yeah. Ka pai.
Dave- Questions board? Dave might have a question. Sorry, Dave.
And just one additional point because it does link to actually what we do
in the housing space is in terms of the national policy
statement- Yes ... as it relates to papakāinga, and being able to
build 10 houses- Mm ... small houses on
papakāinga, and that was led by Paula and the team- Yes ... to change that.
That's right. And that's one of our core functions. Right.
Okay. Supplementary questions- And not just the 10 papakāinga houses, but it's
also a kōhanga or a little community center- Yeah ...
anything else that can adjacent, sit adjacent to those.
Which effectively, builds more papakāinga.
That's right.
It's not just about your house.
As a permitted activity.
Yeah, the village.
As a permitted activity. So that zoning
arrangement, that makes it a permitted activity, not as a restricted discretionary
anything else. So there's a little- Okay
... ordering there. Just on that note, papakāinga,
any plans there about design
urban papakāinga? I know it's difficult because there's not much
whenua Māori, if anything, in urban centers like Tāmaki
Makaurau-
Yes
... however, is that part of the plan, and can you explain?
Well, often there's-- Paula might have a view, but sometimes there is
Māori freehold land within urban areas.
So a great example is when you go down Lake
Road in Taupō.
Aha.
You go down off where the new roundabouts are at the
southern end, you go down, before you hit the mobile, there's a piece of Māori land
on the right-hand side by a hotel. A Shimalan-
Yeah.
Is it a Shimalan hotel?
No, I think it's-
There's a motel there.
Yeah.
Yeah. And there's a huge piece of Māori land.
I'm looking at that saying, "Hey, you could have papakāinga there."
So there's a zoning requirements, and it's got to be rural
land or residential land that apply to these papakāinga
NEZ standards. But my expectation is that there will
be opportunities in the urban space.
Maybe quirky, maybe unique, but there will be opportunities.
Whātua Ōrākei is one of them, because they have Māori land. Cool.
And the changes, thanks minister,
just riffing off the big discussion that was had around papakāinga
and the investments that had been made previously, but also the insights that
come from our own kaimahi and the learnings that we got-
Mm
... from papakāinga Whai Oranga. That all helped in terms of
the changes that have been made and the introduction of the
national standards that are going to be enacted in the second
of July.
Mm.
We know one of the biggest barriers to development on whenua
Māori is around consenting, and so the idea that you have
all councils, where before you had some progressive councils-
Yeah
... who already had
sort of good, I guess permissive consenting
regulations in place to support development of papakāinga.
You had that sort of
a little bit over the whole country.
What the national standard will do is set a
minimum standard for consenting.
So that ideally should make it easier for people, particularly
councils who don't have experiences in consenting in this area.
It should make it more permissible for whanau to be able to develop papakāinga,
which could include potentially urban-based
So all councils will have to meet the minimum standards.
If you're already meeting it above it, you will retain the standard that you have
as a council around these matters.
Mm-hmm.
So everyone will have to come up to a certain level. Those above, they retain.
It's quite a good example, the papakāinga national standard in particular is quite
a good example of how you prototype something, how you try
something, and then that actually ends up being quite
significant in terms of changes across the whole housing system.
Supplementary, Mr. Chair. What considerations are
being made towards not mana whenua, but the mātawaka,
and dealing, helping mana whenua and mātawaka
strike a right balance where there's no kind of like-- It's
almost like a treaty settlement case where mana whenua, by
right it is their whenua. However, many of us in Tāmaki Makaurau do
not affiliate or whakapapa to the whenua.
However, we've been there for generations.
Is there scope within that plan that
focuses on how we do this right by mana whenua and
mātawaka
in an urban papakāinga ideal plan?
This is not policy advice.
No.
This is just thinking about the point that you made, how
do urban Māori,
how do they get the benefits of the national policy statement?
Yeah.
Just thinking about that and thinking about Te Ture Whenua Māori and the ability to
change general land into Māori land,
that just strikes me as one pathway where you may be able to do that.
And if you did that-
You'd qualify
... I think.
Now, I can't make policy on the hoof, but I think that would
then provide an opportunity for
No, but it's, again, if you think about
our role, as the national
policy gets implemented, we will monitor the implementation of that.
We'll also provide guidance and guidelines and so forth.
So as part of that process, we might look for
opportunities of, well, who's being impacted, who actually could need
some further support. And then you actually you could down the
line say, "Well, these are some of the impacts that are coming and that could
affect and be impact-- " You could take lessons from what
that means for whanau who are based in urban centers.
And then through the changes, potentially those could be made.
That doesn't often happen because of the dual purposes of
Te Ture Whenua Māori Act around retention and economic development,
and so often it goes the other way. But through the work that
Paula and the policy team have carried out through the national
policy statement, it might be
seen as there's a real opportunity to create Māori land.
I think the
example that you use,
Moreni, is more an Auckland challenge than
any other urban area, because most of the other urban areas,
in the North Island especially, they do have Māori-owned, iwi-owned,
or Māori freehold type land in those locations.
So you think about New Plymouth as a great example.
There's a 20 hectare block between the links golf course and the sunset.
David knows all about this.
That could be activated. When you look at it, it just sits out like the
proverbial between big developments, and it's just a piece of grass with some cows
on. Plus there's some Māori tapu on there as well.
So I think
mainly the Auckland experience is what you probably talked to, and maybe Wellington
as well, although there is some Māori freehold land out in
Waipatu or out that way, Koronui, out that way.
But when you get the regional cities like Whanganui or
Rotorua or Gisborne, you do have Māori land.
Mm-hmm.
I think it's a good challenge. I think it's something that maybe we can take
offline and look into. David, a quickie but
useful example.
Yeah.
I think it is a good challenge.
It's a good challenge.
Yeah, and also, but well done for what progress we've made with
regards to papakāinga with the upcoming changes.
So I'm going to move now please into the last area of our structured agenda, which
is Māori broadcasting and language entities.
And I wanted to start with the very first question to have clarity
over the appropriation or the estimates that the budget that's actually for it,
including the new initiatives that was announced as well.
So could we just start with that, so we've got great clarity with where that's at
with-
Well, yeah, the first thing is that te reo Māori is part of the DNA of the
country, and the Crown recognizes it has a duty or
obligation to actively protect te reo, and it does that in some ways through the
support it gives to
Māori media and broadcasting entities.
Primarily,
well, actually all Māori language entities.
There have been some rises and falls in the amount of funding that's been
available to the Māori language entities over time.
And it's my hope that we can have more of a shared
outcomes framework across all the entities, so everyone is on a
similar waka paddling a similar way rather than people going in different
directions. And that's one of the reasons why I thought, when I was getting
into politics, Te Matawa was actually established to ensure that that waka was
cohesive and together.
My thoughts and my opinions might have been misplaced.
That's happened once or twice in my life, I think.
So importantly,
the funding that's been committed is $48 million over four
years in addition to the baseline funding.
The actual split between Te Maara Reo and
Makata is yet to be determined. It will be determined in near course,
and proposed to be approved by the Minister of Finance and myself.
Certainly my hope that some of that pūtea will be
baselined.
And let's see where that gets to with the Minister of Finance.
But ultimately, we recognize that there's more work to do in the Māori
broadcasting space to ensure that we get
not only the quantity of speakers, which actually is at a very high level,
but also the quality of speakers and that intergenerational transmission which,
in my view, is going to be the most important thing to ensure the
surviving and thriving of the language.
Tena koe.
Well, yeah, Steve, Mr. Chairman, just to continue
on that, just as a practical matter, the minister's already made clear
that
the baseline funding remains unchanged.
So that is funding for Te Matawai and Totoro,
exactly the same year on year.
Mm-hmm.
Then there's the tag contingency referred to, that's the $48 million in new
funding.
We need to get that approved.
And that comes through as a practical matter into the appropriations,
as I'm sure the committee knows, once joint ministers, Minister of Finance
and Minister Puataka, approve how that's to be split.
And then the other practical thing that needs to happen is the strategic
documents for those relevant entities-
Yes, of course
... need to be updated, and approved by the minister, and then they're tabled in
the house, and that then reflects exactly how that's
going to be spent.
I don't know if Paula, the minister, has picked up on some of the
shared outcomes,
which of course would tie in with the
specialist advisory group.
Yeah.
I wouldn't want to put you on the spot, but maybe that's also of interest.
Do you want to speak to that or...?
No, come on. No
So, and Stephen's mentioned the specialist advisory
group report that was tabled last year, and that's provided really
good direction for us, in terms of further
policy and how you might, as the minister's mentioned, bring all of the
investment together in service of te reo Māori.
So the media and broadcasting is really seen as
an enabler,
so that we can see te reo Māori and culture throughout
all of the places that we can see. But we do need to have
the entities that have a large investment
coming together. The minister has commissioned a shared outcomes framework, and
we expect to see that from Te Matawai
in due course in the next little while.
And then that will provide really the focus for Te Whare i te Reo Māori
order that everybody's heading towards in the same
direction. But it also brings together not only the investment through Te
Matawai and the Māori language entities, but also the other
quite significant investment that's made from other parts of the public service.
Particularly education is a significant enabler-
Yeah
... for te reo Māori and if we have what we call the mahi
Māori and the mahi korona
coming together underneath the whare
towards the shared outcomes that have been commissioned through Te
Matawai,
then that provides a really important focus for te reo Māori.
Yeah.
Tena koe. Can I start please, Mr. Chair?
Just on the-
No, go on then it'll come to you.
Try and jump to the
On te reo Māori.
Jump the queue, Māori Party.
Just first up on those mahi korona hordes.
Mm-hmm. Yep.
So that's
failing, isn't it? That's a failure because not with the
minister who we know has got a lot of respect and 100%
is the advocate for the reo. But if you're
working with the Crown and other ministers,
well, so many ministers are attacking the language.
I just want to get your view on that.
We've got it whether it's Stanford, whether it's Seymour, whether it's Winston
Peters, every one of them seems to be saying there's too much
Māori language. They're wanting to change
the names of government agencies.
Mm.
So the language is being attacked in the education legislation, right
across government agencies, yet you have this regular
meeting with other ... I just want to know, are those me- meetings
happening? Obviously, I'm not questioning the minister's commitment on this, I'm
questioning the relationship with other ministers who are
constantly attacking our language.
Paula can't comment.
She can't comment on it? You want to, Dave?
Look, I can't comment on the relationship with other ministers.
Hmm. Well, do you want to comment, minister?
Yeah, the Reo ... Yeah.
Because you're having to sell it to them, and you're failing.
The Reo
is being convened with Minister Stanford and others.
And as we know, the biggest investment into te reo Māori is through
education.
Mm.
That's literally hundreds of millions of dollars.
Oh.
Finish around in billion. But, that involves other
ministers as well. That will result in a renewal,
which Totara Whiri leads, of the mahi korona.
That has to happen, and my preference is that happens quickly.
Are you angry with your colleagues?
There is-
I'm a massive promoter.
You're what?
I'm a massive promoter-
Well, we know-
... of te reo Māori
We know that
And I think that
we will better stabilize
the cohesion of Aotearoa, New Zealand, if more people spoke
te reo Māori.
Right.
And in a defensible, mākaipātea, taihaoāru way.
So
Sure you can try and ask the question in the future.
So-
Your colleagues are letting you down.
No, I think that
many, many hundreds of thousands of New Zealanders are giving it a go
and be- are becoming more
of exponents in te reo Māori.
Oh, yeah.
And I encourage that. But it's up to individuals to make the choice as well.
You made a comment about how we're getting rid of Māori names.
That's not necessarily the case.
There is a reprioritization of names in some of the
agencies, but not all of the agencies.
But they continue to be branded bilingually as well There's some
pretty strong views, as we've heard from the Toihau, the Te Atawhai, and others
about
how we should
deploy branding and imaging,
and I acknowledge those views. But what I'm really focused on is making sure that
our reo happens, that we get ministers together , that we make sure
we land a refreshed Mai Karuna, and it's one that is part
and parcel of a shared outcomes framework across all the entities.
What I also hope to see, and this has been more in the broadcasting space,
is all the reo irirangi in, I think 21-
Mm
... a step up to increase,
to reach a threshold around their use of te reo Māori on their programs.
And it's been welcome.
Opportunity for me on every Tuesday or Wednesday morning to collaborate with people
like Poor Hatuora,
who do some amazing work on the reo Māori-
Yeah
... reo irirangi stations. Phenomenal.
Well, nobody on this side would question your commitment to the reo.
I don't think any of us would do that.
So we'll
acknowledge that, and
we know how supportive you are. We are concerned, though, about the
government's commitment to the reo and the Māori broadcasting
strategy.
Mm-hmm.
So can you just outline to us, we had Māori Radio
threatening legal action against Te Mangai Paho.
Hmm.
Let them go ahead,
which is good.
But
how comfortable
should Māori Radio be now in terms of the future?
Because right now, they're feeling okay. But what's the future hold?
Because you have talked about private investment.
Is that where you see it going?
Well, I encourage private investors, and whether or not the Māori
or other organizations want to invest in Māori broadcasting, kia kaha,
let's do it. But I don't think that should, and will, ever
replace the obligation of the Crown to actively protect te reo, and for the moment,
that is done in some ways through Māori broadcasting.
Yes, sir.
Te Mangai Paho is going through its
allocation.
Mm.
And that was prior to the
TEG contingency being announced.
I expect that decision will be made shortly, and I'm very
hopeful that there'll be some clarity around that to bear for all the radio
stations and others as well, other content-
We're awaiting a plan. Is there a plan coming forward as well?
No, they've gone through a process to allocate funding.
Right
And that was undertaken and has been undertaken independently of the new
TEG contingency.
Yes.
They'll come to a decision, but they're also going to have to account for
additional funding that will come up. That will end up in the SBS.
And the SOI.
And the SOI with Te Mangai Paho. Sorry, Noho.
Hey, te pai.
Hey, Noho.
Just with the rebrand, the
reprioritization of te reo Māori and English, how much did that cost?
And did the Māori vote actually, did TPK pick up the cost?
Who picked up the cost for changing-
No, I'm not across that cost. That was a matter that was raised through the
coalition arrangements, and my understanding is that any cost would be taken up
by each individual agency that's responsible, and it won't be taken up by
TPK, I can assure you. It's not our job to pick up that cost.
And could I just add, it's in the written material, there is no rebranding at 20
core critic.
No. No, that's across other agencies.
Yeah. It was the switch from, and I don't
know why we prioritized that. However, I want to ask
is for Te Whare i te Reo Māoriora, the big Māori
language strategy, but the policy for
Aotearoa,
does the goal stand 4 million
speakers having been able-
That is the-
... to compensate in te reo by 2040? Is that still our goal?
That's the old-
The old one
... no, the,
which is it? Not the old goal.
Oh, no, that's not the old goal. The ultimate goal.
Mai Karuna.
That's what goal is it, the million speakers. Yes, absolutely.
The Mataranga.
Yeah, the Mataranga. Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
So
how are we doing on that? That's the question.
Well, I think the-
How many speakers are speaking te reo Māori?
We're tracking. We're tracking on-
It's significant
... yeah, about 800,000.
Yeah. Something like that.
We're tracking against that one,
in terms of towards 2040.
The main overarching goals we're tracking towards, but we definitely want to push
them on a bit better. Get the hononga going.
So there's the Aotearoa goal, the Mataranga goal, and the hononga goal.
And can we do better? Yes.
How can we do that? Make sure that we've got the adequate and appropriate funding,
but also the delivery through Māori broadcasting. That's one way.
But you know as much as I, that a lot of the pickup is through music or
through social media content and watching our
He's great. Let's not slam Te Aute.
No, he's on the job. He's on the job.
He is actually influencing the rise of te reo Māori-
Absolutely
... as are many of our rangatahi. So how does this reflect-
Don't forget
... our investment in our rangatahi?
Because we've got so many different demographics of te reo champions out there,
advocates in our education system, right across our communities, online,
on the ground.
Well, um-
What is the investment actually in our rangatahi?
Well, Te Mangai Paho has an assessment arrangement, and they've got
a, what I call it, a
filter, the kopa.
Oh, yes. I know the kopa.
Yeah. Which they use in order to make informed
decisions around allocation of p**e.
And I've been very encouraging of them to not just rely on traditional
medium and traditional platforms, but also to consider
more socially agile platforms and how they might continue to
support those. There's also the Matariki and other related metas
that continue to be funded that will
capitalize and uplift
the interest and the awareness of te reo Māori, and actually tikanga and
the Mataranga.
Mm.
So those things are very important.
Could I just add-
Yes
... one sentence. Thank you, Ms. Cooper.
Again, coming back to the TEG contingency in budget '26-
And to the question, specifically, that is directed at
digital transformation.
Yeah.
So that's part of the project risk.
That's where my next question is going to.
Understanding Whakaata Maori, it was established in
2004 with linear programming, right?
Yes.
The digital transformation has been a topic of discussion within the
industry for many a year. Is there sufficient funding to
assist Whakaata Maori to fully transition and actually the whole
Maori media sector? Because we know the cost of
the equipment alone is actually significant.
Oh, yeah.
The cost to retain the capacity, the dwindling capacity of
Maori journalists, Maori content creators, Maori creatives out there,
it's slimming. So how does this budget reflect over the next four
years that it's a serious investment in not just the
equipment, the digital pathway, but actually
retaining the amazing talent that we do have and growing
that?
Well, I think when you
look in the rear vision, Marie,
you and I-
I see a lot. I see Parekura.
Yeah. You and I might find, and there were
compromises made just to get to that situation too. I won't go into that.
But we see that decisions have been made where we might have gone
on the motorway off-ramp to partner up with TVNZ and others to get to a digital
situation, but we decided to stay on-
Mm
... the linear
pathway, and with the hope that at some stage we will get to digital with
Whakaata. Now, rightly or wrongly, that's what happened.
But now we're in a situation where we're saying, "Well, digital is today, like
yesterday. We've got to keep moving on." That's why we're having these
discussions now about an appropriate level of funding to get it moving forward.
I don't know if it'll cover off all costs, but definitely to move it from where it
is today to a better place in terms of digital transformation.
Steve, you got any comments or observations?
Yeah, I'd just add to that, that the
proposal in Budget '26 doesn't come out of nowhere.
It has been developed-
Yeah
... in consultation with relevant entities and business cases put
forward. And the other aspect which I could comment on,
without too much detail, as a representative of Te Puni Kōkiri, as
the Crown entity monitor here is, of course, these are,
when we're talking about Whakaata Maori, for example, these are well-managed,
well-governed organizations that have shepherded their own resources
well. And I wouldn't want to speculate
before ministers have communicated any decisions, but of
course,
they have strong balance sheets. They have their own resources, and I'm sure they'd
be contributing if they wanted some of that to the transformation project
too.
Yeah, absolutely.
Minister, just one final question.
Just one more, yeah.
One more from me. In terms of Whakaata Maori, it's become
almost the skeleton of its original size, its original intent, and
they are struggling. The studio is not used.
They actually create in-house content.
They're actually outsourcing, and that's not a problem.
However, when you've got a channel that has been dedicated to the
only indigenous channel in the entire country, right, in the entire
Pacific Australasia area, indigenous, no,
MBS over-
NITV
... NITV. However, Te Reo Maori, te Reo Maori, it's the only one that exists.
What
I want to know your vision for Whakaata Maori.
Is it about them creating the content in-house as well as
still providing the platforms for the hubs that
are rising from their regions? Is it just the
platform? Is that part of the plan for Whakaata Maori going
forward, or is it to reestablish it as the content creators and
makers just as much as the broadcast channel for
things like Ka Paka?
Whakaata Maori is its own entity. It's got its own
responsibilities.
And certainly, the
feedback that I've had from Whakaata is it continues to be in the space of
promoting Te Reo Maori, whether or not it's its own content, creative content, or
engaging with others to create that content. I think it's not an either/or.
Again, it's both. That's my view.
Yeah, struggling.
It is struggling, but
I wouldn't say that it's got a
skeleton of a facility. That facility is a serious
facility.
Yeah.
And getting utility out of that facility I think is very, very important because
the amount of investment that's gone into the works and waters out at Ōtara.
So, my hope is that we get more utility, not just
from perhaps the creation of Maori content, but if they need to, other content as
well. Other people can use that facility.
But we do have the rise, too, of other
content creators. So you think about the film studios that were just bought by-
Jason, Cliff
And-
Taika
... and Taika,
after they
missed out on the studios way out west, and they got those
ones closer to the central city. And the content they've created
individually and collectively through shows like Chief
of War,
I think demonstrates that the
protection of our language isn't just limited to
social media and TV or
radio.
Yeah.
But it's going broader than that. And Te Mara Apa and others are going to have some
pretty,
what do you call it, deliberate decisions to make in the coming years about how
they allocate the resources that they receive.
I do think that Whakaata Maori has been responsible for
some extraordinary talent,
but also extraordinary shows.
Oh, thank you.
I was never one for Cybertalk myself, but
happy to tautoko those shows that are not just uplifting
for our own whanau and iwi,
but also for New Zealanders and people globally.
Yeah.
And that's where I think there's a runway
And can I just say to you just as a final, so that commitment's still there, right,
Minister?
Yes.
That's the important thing to say.
Absolutely.
And I take up what you were saying about Te Tata Maori.
The reality is all broadcasting mediums are
struggling.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, TV3, News Hub shut up.
It's gone.
Yeah, it's gone. And TVNZ's struggling.
All the different mediums are struggling.
And the good thing with Whakaata Maori is that they're still existing, they're
still-
Yeah
... surviving, they're still doing some good things.
And just wanted to finish with that.
The commitment's still there from the government, right?
Yes.
Absolutely. And you're working on the platform-
That's why we're going hard in a conversation now-
Yeah
... to figure out how can we catalyze the digital transformation needed to get into
2026,
rather than 2004, which is where it was.
Yeah.
True.
Where it's been for too long.
And it's a legal obligation on the Crown too.
The other thing
Yeah, absolutely. We went all the way to the Privy Council about that.
That's right.
And as you might recall, Maurice Williamson, well-known Pakuranga personality-
Set up my radio
... of the National Party, helped sort the arrangement-
Set up my radio with Honihau
... with the broadcasting ones.
Right. I'm going to bring the hearing to a close now.
Oh, thought we were going to go another story.
And in doing that, I just do want to firstly acknowledge
you coming before us today.
Yes.
And engaging with us. I appreciate that.
We also accept the fact that we have actually traversed some very wide areas, not
specifically totally related to the vote itself, but I think that
demonstrates the passion that we have with regards to getting good outcomes
for Maori. So, I want to just appreciate-
Can I get just before you finish that-
Yeah
... I just wanted to stand and mihi to Dave Sanders.
All right.
Mm.
As his final, hopefully, spring week.
Hopefully we don't get fall down again next week.
And I just want to mihi to Dave and acknowledge him on behalf of all of us.
Yeah.
For your tireless and
determination and commitment to the kaupapa.
Mm.
No matter who the minister or who the kāwanatanga may be, although I know
you like me very much.
But your steely
peacefulness and calm has brought a lot of aroma and
rangimarie to our conversations.
Ana.
But it's also been, I think, exemplary of what public service
means-
Mm
... in Aotearoa, New Zealand. Not necessarily partisan,
and that's actually
the public service, but very determined for the kaupapa.
So I just wanted to acknowledge you, Dave, and the team you were here today.
It is. Love you.
Just to, again, reiterate
my appreciation for Dave's service to Maori and to all New
Zealanders, but also to reflect just on the last couple of weeks, Dave, some of the
projects that you've spearheaded, whether it's the Ahurenuo Awards,
Mataipacific, Mihana.
Mm.
The Fieldays kaupapa. We were making field days Maori and brown again.
The Papakāinga National Environmental State Standards.
The mahi that you did on the Papakāinga,
that is absolutely phenomenal. Some of the support that you've given the Maori
trusts and corporations in iwi. And of course, your staff,
who have been here to scaffold you, but have gathered around you as a
tūwhatawhata for your pā. Tena koe.
Tena koe. Tena koe.
And just before everybody goes then, I noticed that Tama stood up to stand.
When the speaker stands or the chair stands, you know it's something important.
So, this is the mana that I think we're bestowing on you, Dave.
And I wanted to, as the chair of the select committee at this particular point in
time, we as elected members, we're here for such a short time
of what we're doing here. But I have personally thoroughly
enjoyed my engagement with you and the way you've conducted yourself
as a leader, and a leader of a very important entity,
which is Te Puni Kōkiri. For it, and you've devoted
an amount of your career to this role, and I acknowledge that, and the good
mahi.
Clearly there's frustrations on the journey and that, but it's about keeping on the
strong path of wanting to get to the best outcomes you can in the time
that we all have and the roles that we play here itself.
But I thank you, Tama, for standing up and acknowledging.
And we wanted to do the same thing as well.
And although I'm relatively new to this place, this person here is not.
And he's played a number of roles, and I've asked Willie to say a few words as
well. So kia ora mai.
Oh, thanks.
Oh, well, I know it's a bit tough, but as your former favorite minister.
I've got three now.
No, seriously, I wanted to thank you.
I think the committee and everyone here for your service. Service is everything.
Tena koe.
And for you,
no matter who the minister is, the kaupapa is the overriding priority.
Mm.
And so we mihi to you.
As Tama said.
It's quite a commitment. This is hard work.
This is hard work. And you got maybe the toughest role of all as a
CEO of TPK because when things go wrong in Te
Ao Maori, it's all TPK's fault. It's all TPK's
fault. When things go well, oh, well all the other ministers.
They all stand up. So seriously, it's been a
testing time as it should be for the minister.
But you being so committed-
To Nanaia, to myself, and to Minister
Tama over here. You know, Whataka over here.
It's
just been great watching you through the years, Dave, and as I always say to you,
nothing's ever personal. Tama knows the rules better than anyone.
Nothing's ever personal, but at the end of the day, we're all Maori,
and after these hui we come together, and
we come together as Maori and
celebrate our whanaungatanga. So thank you, Dave. Thank you for everything.
And
you've got a good man coming in, right? To replace you.
I'm looking forward to my relation taking over the CEO
role. And good luck to you with your whanau, with your family and your
life. It's been a
privilege and an honor. Tenei te mihi kia koe e te rangatira.
E kore matou e wareware to kaha ki te kokiri nga
kaupapa Maori i nga wa katoa. Nga mihi kia koe.
Koutou tipiki kei. Tena ano tatou.
Makere ana nga
here.
Here
re
re,
waipua e.
Ki nga, ki nga
ropu
rangi.
Whitiwhitia. He
tiroanga.
Mahea ke ma.
Horahora
nu. Makere ana
nga here. Here re re.
Makere, makere
ana nga here.
Kia ora, kia ora tatou.
Does Dave want to have a kora? Dave, kaua e. Very short.
Unlike Willie's questions.
I like Tama's answers.
Well, thank you. That was unexpected, and I do want to thank you
for that honor, Minister,
Willie, Chair, and all of you. This has
been a privilege and an honor. I know that that can seem
quite trite when someone is leaving, but it has been an honor.
It has been difficult and some
of the issues that we've dealt with over the years, I mean, the period has
been beset with crises, but we've gone through that together,
and I do appreciate your support. And I know that support will
continue for my successor, Dion Tuuta, who is a
good man and
a very good senior level executive.
I remember when I came into the public service, I'd done,
I think it was 26 years of service in the military, and
now I've done a further 22 years of service in the public service.
When I came in, I was
brought into the public service by Charlie Tafia, who's now an
iwi leader in Tauranga. And we went to our first ministers
meeting, and it was
a bit of a shock for me. There were some strong words said, not at me in
particular, but we were a group of officials there.
And in the end, I walked out of that meeting
and looked at Charlie,
my senior, and just said,
"Jesus, is it always like that?" And he said, "Boy, welcome to the public
service. In your other profession, you could only get shot."
So kia ora tatou.
Unuhia, unuhia, unuhia e Turutapu.
Unuhia ki a mama, kia wātea, kia ngāwari hoki te wairua, te ngākau, te
hinengaro, te tinana e te aratakata e rongo whakiri ake ki runga. Kia Tina.
Tina.
Hui e.
Tāiki e. Ngā hua o Tina.
Kia ora.